
Chief Justice Rehnquist, President Carter, President Bush,
President Clinton, distinguished guests and my fellow citizens:
The peaceful transfer of authority is rare in history, yet
common in our country. With a simple oath, we affirm old traditions
and make new beginnings.
As I begin, I thank President Clinton for his service to our
nation.
And I thank Vice President Gore for a contest conducted with
spirit and ended with grace.
I am honored and humbled to stand here, where so many of
America’s leaders have come before me, and so many will follow.
We have a place, all of us, in a long story—a story we
continue, but whose end we will not see. It is the story of a new
world that became a friend and liberator of the old, a story of a
slave-holding society that became a servant of freedom, the story
of a power that went into the world to protect but not possess, to
defend but not to conquer.
It is the American story—a story of flawed and fallible people,
united across the generations by grand and enduring ideals.
The grandest of these ideals is an unfolding American promise
that everyone belongs, that everyone deserves a chance, that no
insignificant person was ever born.
Americans are called to enact this promise in our lives and
in our laws. And though our nation has sometimes halted, and
sometimes delayed, we must follow no other course.
Through much of the last century, America’s faith in freedom
and democracy was a rock in a raging sea. Now it is a seed upon the
wind, taking root in many nations.
Our democratic faith is more than the creed of our country, it is
the inborn hope of our humanity, an ideal we carry but do not own,
a trust we bear and pass along. And even after nearly 225 years, we
have a long way yet to travel.
While many of our citizens prosper, others doubt the promise,
even the justice, of our own country. The ambitions of some
Americans are limited by failing schools and hidden prejudice and
the circumstances of their birth. And sometimes our differences run
so deep, it seems we share a continent, but not a country.
We do not accept this, and we will not allow it. Our unity,
our union, is the serious work of leaders and citizens in every
generation. And this is my solemn pledge: I will work to build a
single nation of justice and opportunity.
I know this is in our reach because we are guided by a power
larger than ourselves who creates us equal in His image.
And we are confident in principles that unite and lead us onward.
America has never been united by blood or birth or soil. We are
bound by ideals that move us beyond our backgrounds, lift us above
our interests and teach us what it means to be citizens. Every child
must be taught these principles. Every citizen must uphold them.
And every immigrant, by embracing these ideals, makes our country
more, not less, American.
Today, we affirm a new commitment to live out our nation’s
promise through civility, courage, compassion and character.
America, at its best, matches a commitment to principle with a
concern for civility. A civil society demands from each of us good
will and respect, fair dealing and forgiveness.
Some seem to believe that our politics can afford to be petty
because, in a time of peace, the stakes of our debates appear small.
But the stakes for America are never small. If our country does
not lead the cause of freedom, it will not be led. If we do not turn
the hearts of children toward knowledge and character, we will lose
their gifts and undermine their idealism. If we permit our economy
to drift and decline, the vulnerable will suffer most.
We must live up to the calling we share. Civility is not a tactic
or a sentiment. It is the determined choice of trust over cynicism,
of community over chaos. And this commitment, if we keep it, is a
way to shared accomplishment.
America, at its best, is also courageous.
Our national courage has been clear in times of depression and
war, when defending common dangers defined our common good.
Now we must choose if the example of our fathers and mothers
will inspire us or condemn us. We must show courage in a time of
blessing by confronting problems instead of passing them on to
future generations.
Together, we will reclaim America’s schools, before ignorance
and apathy claim more young lives.
We will reform Social Security and Medicare, sparing our
children from struggles we have the power to prevent. And we will
reduce taxes, to recover the momentum of our economy and reward
the effort and enterprise of working Americans.
We will build our defenses beyond challenge, lest weakness
invite challenge.
We will confront weapons of mass destruction, so that a new
century is spared new horrors.
The enemies of liberty and our country should make no mistake:
America remains engaged in the world by history and by choice,
shaping a balance of power that favors freedom. We will defend our
allies and our interests. We will show purpose without arrogance.
We will meet aggression and bad faith with resolve and strength.
And to all nations, we will speak for the values that gave our nation
birth.
America, at its best, is compassionate. In the quiet of American
conscience, we know that deep, persistent poverty is unworthy of
our nation’s promise.
And whatever our views of its cause, we can agree that children
at risk are not at fault. Abandonment and abuse are not acts of God,
they are failures of love.
And the proliferation of prisons, however necessary, is no
substitute for hope and order in our souls.
Where there is suffering, there is duty. Americans in need are
not strangers, they are citizens, not problems, but priorities. And all
of us are diminished when any are hopeless.
Government has great responsibilities for public safety and
public health, for civil rights and common schools. Yet compassion
is the work of a nation, not just a government.
And some needs and hurts are so deep they will only respond to a
mentor’s touch or a pastor’s prayer. Church and charity, synagogue
and mosque lend our communities their humanity, and they will
have an honored place in our plans and in our laws.
Many in our country do not know the pain of poverty, but we can
listen to those who do.
And I can pledge our nation to a goal: When we see that
wounded traveler on the road to Jericho, we will not pass to the
other side.
America, at its best, is a place where personal responsibility is
valued and expected.
Encouraging responsibility is not a search for scapegoats, it is
a call to conscience. And though it requires sacrifice, it brings a
deeper fulfillment. We find the fullness of life not only in options,
but in commitments. And we find that children and community are
the commitments that set us free.
Our public interest depends on private character, on civic duty
and family bonds and basic fairness, on uncounted, unhonored acts
of decency which give direction to our freedom.
Sometimes in life we are called to do great things. But as a saint
of our times has said, every day we are called to do small things
with great love. The most important tasks of a democracy are done
by everyone.
I will live and lead by these principles: to advance my
convictions with civility, to pursue the public interest with courage,
to speak for greater justice and compassion, to call for responsibility
and try to live it as well.
In all these ways, I will bring the values of our history to the care
of our times.
What you do is as important as anything government does. I ask
you to seek a common good beyond your comfort; to defend needed
reforms against easy attacks; to serve your nation, beginning with
your neighbor. I ask you to be citizens: citizens, not spectators;
citizens, not subjects; responsible citizens, building communities of
service and a nation of character.
Americans are generous and strong and decent, not because we
believe in ourselves, but because we hold beliefs beyond ourselves.
When this spirit of citizenship is missing, no government program
can replace it. When this spirit is present, no wrong can stand
against it.
After the Declaration of Independence was signed, Virginia
statesman John Page wrote to Thomas Jefferson: "We know the race
is not to the swift nor the battle to the strong. Do you not think an
angel rides in the whirlwind and directs this storm?"
Much time has passed since Jefferson arrived for his
inauguration. The years and changes accumulate. But the themes of
this day he would know: our nation’s grand story of courage and its
simple dream of dignity.
We are not this story’s author, who fills time and eternity with
his purpose. Yet his purpose is achieved in our duty, and our duty is
fulfilled in service to one another.
Never tiring, never yielding, never finishing, we renew that
purpose today, to make our country more just and generous, to
affirm the dignity of our lives and every life.
This work continues. This story goes on. And an angel still rides
in the whirlwind and directs this storm.
God bless you all, and God bless America.
The First Lady and I are honored to be living here, and we’re
honored to be hosting this event—the first we’ve done in this
glorious room since the Inauguration.
I want to thank the family members who are here. Thank you
for your sacrifice. Thank you for the long hours, for accepting the
long hours that your loved one is about to put in on behalf of the
American people. Some of the folks that are here have worked in
past administrations. For some of us, this is a new experience. But
for all of us, it is an honor of a lifetime, and it is our privilege to
share this together.
I am here to lead the executive branch of government. You all
are here because you have my full confidence. And we are here with
the same basic purpose, to serve the American people. We have all
taken an oath, and from this moment on it is our job to honor it.
Today everything is so promising and new. My hope is that the
day will never come when any of us take this place for granted and
this honor for granted. As we serve, we must always remember
three things.
First, we must remember the high standards that come with
high office. This begins with careful adherence to the rules. I
expect every member of this administration to stay well within
the boundaries that define legal and ethical conduct. This means
avoiding even the appearance of problems. This means checking
and, if need be, double-checking that the rules have been obeyed.
This means never compromising those rules. No one in the White
House should be afraid to confront the people they work for, for
ethical concerns. And no one should hesitate to confront me, as
well. We’re all accountable to one another. And above all, we’re
all accountable to the law and to the American people. My White
House Counsel, Al Gonzalez, is my point man on these issues. If
you have even a hint of ethical doubt, I urge you to talk to Al.
Second, we must remember that high standards of conduct
involve not only obeying the law but showing civility. As we go
about our work, there is no excuse for arrogance and never a reason
for disrespect toward others. People who work here are highly
visible throughout the government. In many ways, in many of your
dealings, you’ll be the face and voice of the White House staff. You
will be my representative. I expect each of you, as an official of
this administration, to be an example of humility and decency and
fairness.
And finally, we must all remember that we are here for a
reason. You and I and the Vice President share the same goals for
our country and the same commitment to achieving them. We are
here to make progress. We are not here just to mark time. During
the next few weeks, we’ll affirm the central policy goals of this
administration, beginning this week with education reform.
Everyone will know where we stand. Everyone will know where
we’re headed. Every morning I want you to remember these goals.
Every evening I want you to review the progress we have made.
I want it said of us, at the end of our service, that promises made
were promises kept.
On a mantelpiece in this great house is inscribed the prayer of
John Adams, that only the wise and honest may rule under this
roof. He was speaking of those who live here. But wisdom and
honesty are also required of those who work here. I know each of
you is capable of meeting that charge. This is only our second day,
but time moves fast around here. So let us begin the work we were
hired to do and leave this a better place than we found it.

Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Appreciate you being here. And it’s
good to see a former secretary of Education here. Lamar, thank you
very much for coming. Surrounded by two fine Texans, I might add.
You are in good position! I was going to say a rose between two
thorns - but Diane Natalisio is not a thorn, she’s a fabulous educator
in the great state of Texas. Miller, on the other hand... at any rate,
I’m glad you all are here. It’s good to see so many faces of friends.
Welcome you to our new temporary abode.
This is an important moment for my administration because I
spent such amount of — a long amount of time campaigning on
education reform. It’s been the hallmark of my time as governor of
Texas. My focus will be on making sure every child is educated, as
the president of the United States as well.
Both parties have been talking about education reform for quite
a while. It’s time to come together to get it done so that we can
truthfully say in America, “No child will be left behind — not one
single child.”
We share a moment of exceptional promise — a new
administration, a newly sworn-in Congress, and we have a chance
to think anew and act anew.
All of us are impatient with the old lines of division. All of us
want a different attitude here in the nation’s capital. All in this room,
as well as across the country, know things must change.
We must confront the scandal of illiteracy in America, seen most
clearly in high-poverty schools, where nearly 70 percent of fourth
graders are unable to read at a basic level. We must address the low
standing of America test scores amongst industrialized nations in
math and science, the very subjects most likely to affect our future
competitiveness. We must focus the spending of federal tax dollars
on things that work. Too often we have spent without regard for
results, without judging success or failure from year to year.
We must face up to the plague of school violence, with an
average of 3 million crimes committed against students and teachers
inside public schools every year. That’s unacceptable in our country.
Change will not come by adding a few new federal programs to the
old. If we work only at the edges, our influence will be confined to
the margins. We need real reform.
Change will not come by disdaining or dismantling the federal
role of education. I believe strongly in local control of schools. I
trust local folks to chart the path to excellence. But educational
excellence for all is a national issue, and at this moment is a
presidential priority. I’ve seen how real education reform can lift up
scores in schools and effectively change lives.
And real education reform reflects four basic commitments.
First, children must be tested every year in reading and math. Every
single year. Not just in the third grade or the eighth grade, but in the
third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh and eighth grade. I oppose a
national test, one designed here in Washington, D.C., because I now
it would undermine local control of schools and undermine state
curricula. But states should test each student each year. Without
yearly testing, we don’t know who is falling behind and who needs
help. Without yearly testing, too often we don’t find failure until it
is too late to fix.
Consider what some parents face under the current system in
some states. A child may pass the third grade reading test.
He or she gets in the eighth grade and, lo and behold, fails the
eighth grade test. And the parent says, “Who do I hold accountable?
What happened? My child was successful in the third, and here he
or she is in the eighth. What went wrong? How come? Where did
the system let me down?”
Too much precious time has lapsed in this case for us to achieve
what we want: every child being able to learn. Testing every child
every year is the way to stop the cycle. We must care enough to
ask how our children are doing. We must have the data to know
how poor and minority children are doing, to see if we’re closing
the achievement gap in America. Annual measurement is a special
concern of mine. I understand it’s crucial — it’s a crucial part of —
of a solid reform package.
But the good news is, I’m not alone. Take, for example,
Congressman George Miller from California. Some might think it
odd that the President — a Republican President be mentioning a
Democrat member of the House. But he and I have had discussions
already. He understands the importance of strong accountability.
And we’re going to work together to make sure this is an integral
part of a reform package coming through the House and Senate.
Secondly, the agents of reform must be schools and school
districts, not bureaucracies. Teachers and principals, local and state
leaders must have the responsibility to succeed and the flexibility
to innovate. One size does not fit all when it comes to educating the
children in America. School districts, school officials, educational
entrepreneurs should not be hindered by excessive rules and red
tape and regulation.
The principle here is a basic one. If local schools do not have the
freedom to change, they cannot be held accountable for failing to
change. Authority and accountability must be aligned at the local
level, or schools will have a convenient excuse for failure. “I would
have done it this way, but some central office or Washington, D.C.,
caused me to do it another way.”
Flexibility in education spending is a special concern of
members of both parties with whom I’ve discussed. Today I had a
good meeting with the chairman of the Education Committee in the
House, John Boehner. I know he shares my passion for flexibility
at the local level, as with people like Senator Judd Gregg or Tim
Hutchinson.
Third, many of our schools, particularly low-income schools,
will need help in the transition to higher standards. When a state
sets standards, we must help schools achieve those standards.
We must measure, we must know; and if a school or school
district falls short, we must understand that help should be applied.
Senator Jeff Bingaman of New Mexico brought this up to our
attention, about the need to make sure there is a transition period
between the moment — the moment of consequence and the first
indication of failure. Once failing schools are identified, we will
help them improve. We’ll help them help themselves. Our goal is to
improve public education. We want success, and when schools are
willing to accept the reality that the accountability system points out
and are willing to change, we will help them.
Fourth, American children must not be left in persistently
dangerous or failing schools. When schools do not teach and will
not change, parents and students must have other meaningful
options. And when children or teenagers go to school afraid of
being threatened or attacked or worst, our society must make it clear
it’s the ultimate betrayal of adult responsibility.
Parents and children who have only bad options must eventually
get good options, if we are to succeed all across the country. There
are difference of opinions about what those options should be. I
made my opinion very clear in the course of the campaign, and will
take my opinion to the Hill and let folks debate it.
Today, I was pleased to see that Senator Joe Lieberman brought
up his plan that includes different options for parents. It’s a
great place to begin. He and I understand that an accountability
system must have a consequence; otherwise, it’s not much of an
accountability system.
These four principles are the guides to our education reform
package. Yet today I’m offering more than principles. I’m sending a
series of specific proposals to the United States Congress; my own
blueprint for reform. I want to begin our discussion in detail with
the members of the House and the Senate, because I know we need
to act by this summer so that the people at the local level can take
our initiatives and plan for the school year beginning next fall.
I’m going to listen to suggestions from folks. If somebody’s got
a better idea, I hope they bring it forward, because the secretary and
I will listen.

We’ve got one thing in mind: an education system that’s
responsive to the children, an education system that educates every
child, an education system that I’m confident can exist; one that’s
based upon sound fundamental curriculum, one that starts teaching
children to read early in life, one that focuses on systems that do
work, one that heralds our teachers and makes sure they’ve got the
necessary tools to teach, but one that says every child can learn.
And in this great land called America, no child will be left behind.
It’s an honor to be here. I’m so thrilled you all came. God bless.

Good morning. Thank you all for coming. I take great joy
in making this announcement. It’s going to be one of the most
important initiatives that my administration not only discusses, but
implements.
First, it’s good to have so many groups represented here religious
and non-religious; Catholic, Jewish, Protestant, and Muslim;
foundations and other non-profits. I want to thank you all for
coming.
This is a collection of some of the finest America has got to
offer people who lead with their hearts, and in turn, have changed
the communities in which they live for the better. This meeting is a
picture of the strength and diversity and compassion of our country.
This is a diverse group, but we share things in common. They
provide more than practical help to people in need. They touch and
change hearts. And for this, America is deeply appreciative.
Everyone in this room knows firsthand that there are still deep
needs and real suffering in the shadow of America’s affluence.
Problems like addiction and abandonment and gang violence,
domestic violence, mental illness and homelessness. We are called
by conscience to respond.
As I said in my inaugural address, compassion is the work
of a nation, not just a government. It is more than the calling of
politicians; it is the calling of citizens. It is citizens who turn mean
streets into good neighborhoods. It is citizens who turn cold cities
into real communities.
It is one of the great goals of my administration to invigorate the
spirit of involvement and citizenship. We will encourage faith-based
and community programs without changing their mission. We will
help all in their work to change hearts while keeping a commitment
to pluralism.
I approach this goal with some basic principles: Government has
important responsibilities for public health or public order and civil
rights. Yet government — and government will never be replaced
by charities and community groups. Yet when we see social needs in
America, my administration will look first to faith-based programs
and community groups, which have proven their power to save
and change lives. We will not fund the religious activities of any
group, but when people of faith provide social services, we will not
discriminate against them.
As long as there are secular alternatives, faith-based charities
should be able to compete for funding on an equal basis, and in a
manner that does not cause them to sacrifice their mission. And we
will make sure that help goes to large organizations and to small
ones as well. We value large organizations with generations of
experience. We also value neighborhood healers, who have only the
scars and testimony of their own experience.
Tomorrow I will begin turning these principles into a legislative
agenda. I will send to Congress a series of ideas and proposals.
Today, I want to raise the priority and profile of these issues within
my own administration. I want to ensure that faith-based and
community groups will always have a place at the table in our
deliberations.
In a few moments, I will sign two executive orders. The first
executive order will create a new office, called the White House
Office of Faith-based and Community Initiatives. The head of this
office will report directly to me and be charged with important
responsibilities. He will oversee our initiatives on this issue. He will
make sure our government, where it works with private groups, is
fair and supportive. And he will highlight groups as national models
so others can learn from them.
The second executive order will clear away the bureaucratic
barriers in several important agencies that make private groups
hesitate to work with government. It will establish centers in five
agencies — Justice, HUD, HHS, Labor and Education — to ensure
greater cooperation between the government and the independent
sector. These centers will report back on regulatory barriers to
working with non-profit groups, and make recommendations on
how those barriers can be removed.
I have put this broad effort into the hands of two exceptional
people — first, Steve Goldsmith, known as one of the most
innovative mayors in America, who pioneered ways to promote
community efforts. He will continue to advise me on these issues.
And I have asked Steve to serve on the board of the Corporation for
National Service.
This organization has done some good work in mobilizing
volunteers of all ages. I’ve asked Steve to report to me on how we
can make the corporation do better, and to get help where it’s most
needed.
And secondly, Professor John Dilulio will head the new office
I am announcing today. He is one of the most influential social
entrepreneurs in America. I can’t tell you how honored I am for
him to leave his post in academia to join us. He is the author of a
respected textbook on American government. He has a servant’s
heart on the issues that we will confront. He’s worked with
disadvantaged children. He has been a major force in mobilizing the
city of Philadelphia to support faith-based and community groups.
It’s a fantastic team. I’m honored to have them on my team. I
look forward to hearing from them, as well as I look forward to
working with the people in this room and the social entrepreneurs
all across America who have heard the universal call to love a
neighbor like they’d like to be loved themselves; to exist and work
hard, not out of the love of money, but out of the love of their
fellow human beings. I’m absolutely convinced the great fabric of
the nation exists in neighborhoods, amongst unsung heroes who
do heroic acts on a daily and hourly basis. It’s the fabric of the
country that makes America unique. It is — the power of promise
that makes the future so promising is the power of the missions that
stand behind me.
This is an effort that will be an effort from, now the second
week of my administration to the last week of my administration,
because I am confident that this initiative, when fully implemented,
will help us realize the dream that America, its hopes, its promise,
its greatness, will extend its reach throughout every single
neighborhood, all across the land.
And now it is my honor to sign the two executive orders.
Well, thank you all very much for that warm welcome. Laura and
I are honored to be here this morning. I did a pretty good job when
it came to picking my wife, by the way. She’s going to be a fabulous
First Lady.
Mr. Vice President, it’s good to see you; of course, your wife,
Lynn. And I want to thank the members of my Cabinet who are
here. I appreciate you, Senator Frist, for your commitment and
strong comments. And, Zach, thanks for your introduction. And
thank you both for organizing this important event.
I want to thank the members of the House and Senate who are
here. I appreciate the number of foreign dignitaries who are here. It
just goes to show that faith crosses every border, and touches every
heart in every nation.
Every President since the first one I can remember, Dwight
Eisenhower, has taken part in this great tradition. It’s a privilege
for me to speak where they have spoken, and to pray where they
have prayed. All Presidents of the United States have come to
the National Prayer Breakfast, regardless of their religious views.
No matter what our background, in prayer we share something
universal — a desire to speak and listen to our Maker, and to know
His plan for our lives.
America’s Constitution forbids a religious test for office, and
that’s the way it should be. An American President serves people
of every faith, and serves some of no faith at all. Yet I have found
my faith helps me in the service to people. Faith teaches humility.
As Laura would say, I could use a dose occasionally. A recognition
that we are small in God’s universe, yet precious in His sight.
It has sustained me in moments of success, and in moments of
disappointment. Without it I would be a different person, and
without it I doubt I’d be here today.
There are many experiences of faith in this room. But most
of us share a belief that we are loved, and called to love; that our
choices matter, now and forever; that there are purposes deeper
than ambition and hopes greater than success. These beliefs shape
our lives and help sustain the life of our nation. Men and women
can be good without faith, but faith is a force of goodness. Men and
women can be compassionate without faith, but faith often inspires
compassion. Human beings can love without faith, but faith is a
great teacher of love.
Our country, from its beginnings has recognized the contribution
of faith. We do not impose any religion; we welcome all religions.
We do not prescribe any prayer, we welcome all prayers. This
is the tradition of our nation, and it will be the standard of my
administration. We will respect every creed. We will honor the
diversity of our country and the deep convictions of our people.
There’s a good reason why many in our nation embrace the faith
tradition. Throughout our history people of faith have often been
our nation’s voice of conscience. The foes of slavery could appeal
to the standard that all are created equal in the sight of our Lord.
The civil rights movement had the same conviction on its side —
that men and women bearing God’s image should not be exploited
and set aside, and treated as insignificant. The same impulse over
the years has reformed prisons and mental institutions, hospitals,
hospices, and homeless shelters.
The Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr. said this: “The church
must be reminded that it is not the master or the servant of the
state, but rather the conscience of the state.” As in his case, that
sometimes means defying the times, challenging old ways and old
assumptions. This influence has made our nation more just and
generous and decent. And our nation has need of that today.
Faith remains important to the compassion of our nation.
Millions of Americans serve their neighbor because they love their
God. Their lives are characterized by kindness and patience, and
service to others. They do for others what no government really can
ever do — no government program can really ever do: They provide
love for another human being. They provide hope even when hope
comes hard.
In my second week in office we have set out to promote the work
of community and faith-based charities. We want to encourage the
inspired, to help the helper. Government cannot be replaced by
charities, but it can welcome them as partners instead of resenting
them as rivals.
My administration will put the federal government squarely on
the side of America’s armies of compassion. Our plan will not favor
religious institutions over non-religious institutions. As President,
I’m interested in what is constitutional, and I’m interested in what
works. The days of discriminating against religious institutions,
simply because they are religious, must come to an end.
Faith is also important to the civility of our country. It teaches us
not merely to tolerate one another, but to respect one another — to
show a regard for different views and the courtesy to listen. This
is essential to democracy. It is also the proper way to treat human
beings created in the divine image.
We’ll have our disagreements. Civility does not require us to
abandon deeply-held beliefs. Civility does not demand casual
creeds and colorless convictions. Americans have always believed
that civility and firm resolve could live easily with one another.
But civility does mean that our public debate ought to be free from
bitterness and anger, rancor and ill-will. We have an obligation to
make our case, not to demonize our opponents. As the Book of
James reminds us, fresh water and salt water cannot flow from the
same spring.
I am under no illusion that civility will triumph in this city all at
once. Old habits die hard — and sometimes they never die at all. I
can only pledge to you this; that I will do my very best to promote
civility, and ask for the same in return.
These are some of the crucial contributions of faith to our
nation: justice, and compassion, and a civil and generous society. I
thank you for displaying these values, and defending them, here in
————
21

America and across the world. You strengthen the ties of friendship
and the ties of nations. And I deeply appreciate your work.
I believe in the power of prayer. It’s been said: “I would rather
stand against the cannons of the wicked than against the prayers
of the righteous.” The prayers of a friend are one of life’s most
gracious gifts. My family and I are blessed by the prayers of
countless Americans. Over the last several months, Laura and I
have been touched by the number of people who come up and say,
“We pray for you.” Such comforting words. I hope Americans will
continue to pray that everyone in my administration finds wisdom,
and always remembers the common good.
When President Harry Truman took office in 1945, he said: “At
this moment, I have in my heart a prayer. I ask only to be a good
and faithful servant of my Lord and my people.” This has been the
prayer of many Presidents, and it is mine today. God bless.

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, members of Congress: It’s
a great privilege to be here to outline a new budget and a new
approach for governing our great country. I thank you for your
invitation to speak here tonight. I know Congress had to formally
invite me, and it could have been a close vote. So, Mr. Vice
President, I appreciate you being here to break the tie.
I want to thank so many of you who have accepted my invitation
to come to the White House to discuss important issues. We’re off
to a good start. I will continue to meet with you and ask for your
input. You have been kind and candid, and I thank you for making a
new President feel welcome.
The last time I visited the Capitol, I came to take an oath on the
steps of this building. I pledged to honor our Constitution and laws.
And I asked you to join me in setting a tone of civility and respect
in Washington.
I hope America is noticing the difference, because we’re making
progress. Together, we are changing the tone in the Nation’s Capital.
And this spirit of respect and cooperation is vital, because, in the
end, we will be judged not only by what we say or how we say it,
we will be judged by what we’re able to accomplish.
America today is a nation with great challenges, but greater
resources. An artist using statistics as a brush could paint two
very different pictures of our country. One would have warning
signs: increasing layoffs, rising energy prices, too many failing
schools, persistent poverty, the stubborn vestiges of racism.
Another picture would be full of blessings: a balanced budget, big
surpluses, a military that is second to none, a country at peace with
its neighbors, technology that is revolutionizing the world, and our
greatest strength — concerned citizens who care for our country and
care for each other.
Neither picture is complete in and of itself. And tonight I
challenge and invite Congress to work with me to use the resources
of one picture to repaint the other; to direct the advantages of our
time to solve the problems of our people. Some of these resources
will come from government. Some, but not all.
Year after year in Washington, budget debates seem to come
down to an old, tired argument: on one side, those who want more
government, regardless of the cost; on the other, those who want
less government, regardless of the need. We should leave those
arguments to the last century, and chart a different course.
Government has a role, and an important role. Yet, too much
government crowds out initiative and hard work, private charity and
the private economy. Our new governing vision says government
should be active, but limited; engaged, but not overbearing. And my
budget is based on that philosophy.
It is reasonable, and it is responsible. It meets our obligations,
and funds our growing needs. We increase spending next year for
Social Security and Medicare, and other entitlement programs, by
$81 billion. We’ve increased spending for discretionary programs
by a very responsible 4 percent, above the rate of inflation. My plan
pays down an unprecedented amount of our national debt. And then,
when money is still left over, my plan returns it to the people who
earned it in the first place.
A budget’s impact is counted in dollars, but measured in lives.
Excellent schools, quality health care, a secure retirement, a cleaner
environment, a stronger defense — these are all important needs,
and we fund them. The highest percentage increase in our budget
should go to our children’s education. Education is not my top
priority — education is my top priority and, by supporting this
budget, you’ll make it yours, as well.
Reading is the foundation of all learning. So during the next
five years, we triple spending, adding $5 billion to help every child
in America learn to read. Values are important, so we’ve tripled
funding for character education to teach our children not only
————
24

reading and writing, but right from wrong.
We’ve increased funding to train and recruit teachers, because
we know a good education starts with a good teacher. And I have a
wonderful partner in this effort. I like teachers so much, I married
one. Laura has begun a new effort to recruit Americans to the
profession that will shape our future — teaching. She will travel
across America to promote sound teaching practices and early
reading skills in our schools and in programs such as Head Start.
When it comes to our schools, dollars alone do not always make
the difference. Funding is important, and so is reform. So we must
tie funding to higher standards and accountability for results.
I believe in local control of schools. We should not, and we will
not, run public schools from Washington, D.C. Yet when the federal
government spends tax dollars, we must insist on results. Children
should be tested on basic reading and math skills every year
between grades three and eight. Measuring is the only way to know
whether all our children are learning. And I want to know, because I
refuse to leave any child behind in America.
Critics of testing contend it distracts from learning. They talk
about teaching to the test. But let’s put that logic to the test. If you
test a child on basic math and reading skills, and you’re teaching
to the test, you’re teaching math and reading. And that’s the whole
idea. As standards rise, local schools will need more flexibility to
meet them. So we must streamline the dozens of federal education
programs into five, and let states spend money in those categories as
they see fit.
Schools will be given a reasonable chance to improve and the
support to do so. Yet, if they don’t, if they continue to fail, we must
give parents and students different options — a better public school,
a private school, tutoring or a charter school. In the end, every child
in a bad situation must be given a better choice because, when it
comes to our children, failure is simply not an option.
Another priority in my budget is to keep the vital promises
of Medicare and Social Security, and together we will do so. To
meet the health care needs of all America’s seniors, we double
————
25

the Medicare budget over the next 10 years. My budget dedicates
$238 billion to Medicare next year alone, enough to fund all
current programs and to begin a new prescription drug benefit for
low-income seniors. No senior in America should have to choose
between buying food and buying prescriptions.
To make sure the retirement savings of America’s seniors are not
diverted in any other program, my budget protects all $2.6 trillion
of the Social Security surplus for Social Security, and for Social
Security alone.
My budget puts a priority on access to health care, without
telling Americans what doctor they have to see or what coverage
they must choose. Many working Americans do not have health
care coverage, so we will help them buy their own insurance with
refundable tax credits. And to provide quality care in low-income
neighborhoods, over the next five years we will double the number
of people served at community health care centers.
And we will address the concerns of those who have health
coverage, yet worry their insurance company doesn’t care and won’t
pay. Together this Congress and this President will find common
ground to make sure doctors make medical decisions, and patients
get the health care they deserve with a patients’ bill of rights.
When it comes to their health, people want to get the medical
care they need, not be forced to go to court because they didn’t
get it. We will ensure access to the courts for those with legitimate
claims. But first, let’s put in place a strong, independent review so
we promote quality health care, not frivolous lawsuits.
My budget also increases funding for medical research, which
gives hope to many who struggle with serious disease. Our
prayers tonight are with one of your own who is engaged in his
own fight against cancer — a fine representative, and a good man,
Congressman Joe Moakley. I can think of no more appropriate
tribute to Joe than to have the Congress finish the job of doubling
the budget for the National Institutes of Health.
My new Freedom Initiative for Americans with Disabilities
funds new technologies, expands opportunities to work, and
————
26

makes our society more welcoming. For the more than 50 million
Americans with disabilities, we need to break down barriers to
equality.
The budget I propose to you also supports the people who keep
our country strong and free, the men and women who serve in the
United States military. I’m requesting $5.7 billion in increased
military pay and benefits, and health care and housing. Our men and
women in uniform give America their best and we owe them our
support.
America’s veterans honored their commitment to our country
through their military service. I will honor our commitment to them
with a million-dollar increase to ensure better access to quality care
and faster decisions on benefit claims.
My budget will improve our environment by accelerating the
cleanup of toxic brownfields. And I propose we make a major
investment in conservation by fully funding the Land and Water
Conservation Fund. Our national parks have a special place in
our country’s life. Our parks are places of great natural beauty and
history. As good stewards, we must leave them better than we found
them. So I propose providing $4.9 billion over five years for the
upkeep of these national treasures.
And my budget adopts a hopeful new approach to help the poor
and the disadvantaged. We must encourage and support the work
of charities and faith-based and community groups that offer help
and love one person at a time. These groups are working in every
neighborhood in America to fight homelessness and addiction and
domestic violence; to provide a hot meal or a mentor or a safe haven
for our children. Government should welcome these groups to apply
for funds, not discriminate against them.
Government cannot be replaced by charities or volunteers.
Government should not fund religious activities. But our nation
should support the good works of these good people who are
helping their neighbors in need. So I propose allowing all
taxpayers, whether they itemize or not, to deduct their charitable
contributions. Estimates show this could encourage as much as $14
————
27

billion a year in new charitable giving, money that will save and
change lives.
Our budget provides more than $700 million over the next 10
years for a federal compassion capital fund, with a focused and
noble mission, to provide a mentor to the more than 100 million
children with a parent in prison, and to support other local efforts
to fight illiteracy, teen pregnancy, drug addiction and other difficult
problems.
With us tonight is the Mayor of Philadelphia. Please help me
welcome Mayor John Street. Mayor Street has encouraged faithbased and community organizations to make a significant difference
in Philadelphia. He’s invited me to his city this summer to see
compassionate action. I’m personally aware of just how effective
the Mayor is. Mayor Street’s a Democrat. Let the record show, I
lost his city, big time. But some things are bigger than politics.
So I look forward to coming to your city, to see your faith-based
programs in action.
As government promotes compassion, it also must promote
justice. Too many of our citizens have cause to doubt our nation’s
justice, when the law points a finger of suspicion at groups, instead
of individuals. All our citizens are created equal, and must be
treated equally.
Earlier today, I asked John Ashcroft, the Attorney General, to
develop specific recommendations to end racial profiling. It’s wrong
and we will end it in America. In so doing, we will not hinder the
work of our nation’s brave police officers. They protect us every day
— often at great risk. But by stopping the abuses of a few, we will
add to the public confidence our police officers earn and deserve.
My budget has funded a responsible increase in our ongoing
operations. It has funded our nation’s important priorities. It has
protected Social Security and Medicare. And our surpluses are big
enough that there is still money left over.
Many of you have talked about the need to pay down our
national debt. I listened, and I agree. We owe it to our children and
grandchildren to act now, and I hope you will join me to pay down
————
28

$2 trillion in debt during the next 10 years. At the end of those 10
years, we will have paid down all the debt that is available to retire.
That is more debt, repaid more quickly than has ever been repaid by
any nation at any time in history.
We should also prepare for the unexpected, for the uncertainties
of the future. We should approach our nation’s budget as any
prudent family would, with a contingency fund for emergencies or
additional spending needs. For example, after a strategic review, we
may need to increase defense spending. We may need to increase
spending for our farmers or additional money to reform Medicare.
And so, my budget sets aside almost a trillion dollars over 10 years
for additional needs. That is one trillion additional reasons you can
feel comfortable supporting this budget.
We have increased our budget at a responsible 4 percent. We
have funded our priorities. We paid down all the available debt. We
have prepared for contingencies. And we still have money left over.
Yogi Berra once said, “When you come to a fork in the road, take
it.” Now, we come to a fork in the road; we have two choices. Even
though we have already met our needs, we could spend the money
on more and bigger government. That’s the road our nation has
traveled in recent years.
Last year, government spending shot up 8 percent. That’s far
more than our economy grew, far more than personal income grew,
and far more than the rate of inflation. If you continue on that road,
you will spend the surplus and have to dip into Social Security to
pay other bills. Unrestrained government spending is a dangerous
road to deficits, so we must take a different path. The other choice
is to let the American people spend their own money to meet their
own needs.
I hope you will join me in standing firmly on the side of the
people. You see, the growing surplus exists because taxes are too
high and government is charging more than it needs. The people
of America have been overcharged and, on their behalf, I am here
asking for a refund.
Some say my tax plan is too big. Others say it’s too small. I
————
29

respectfully disagree. This plan is just right. I didn’t throw darts
at the board to come up with a number for tax relief. I didn’t take a
poll or develop an arbitrary formula that might sound good. I looked
at problems in the Tax Code and calculated the cost to fix them.
A tax rate of 15 percent is too high for those who earn low
wages, so we must lower the rate to 10 percent. No one should pay
more than a third of the money they earn in federal income taxes, so
we lowered the top rate to 33 percent.
This reform will be welcome relief for America’s small
businesses, which often pay taxes at the highest rate. And help for
small business means jobs for Americans. We simplified the Tax
Code by reducing the number of tax rates from the current five rates
to four lower ones, 10 percent, 15, 25 and 33 percent. In my plan,
no one is targeted in or targeted out. Everyone who pays income
taxes will get relief.
Our government should not tax, and thereby discourage
marriage, so we reduced the marriage penalty. I want to help
families rear and support their children, so we doubled the child
credit to $1,000 per child. It’s not fair to tax the same earnings
twice — once when you earn them, and again when you die — so
we must repeal the death tax.
These changes add up to significant help. A typical family with
two children will save $1,600 a year on their federal income taxes.
Now, $1,600 may not sound like a lot to some, but it means a lot to
many families: $1,600 buys gas for two cars for an entire year; it
pays tuition for a year at a community college; it pays the average
family grocery bill for three months. That’s real money.
With us tonight representing many American families are
Steven and Josefina Ramos. They are from Pennsylvania. But
they could be from any one of your districts. Steven is the network
administrator for a school district. Josefina is a Spanish teacher at a
charter school. And they have a two-year-old daughter.
Steven and Josefina tell me they pay almost $8,000 a year in
federal income taxes. My plan will save them more than $2,000. Let
me tell you what Steven says: “Two thousand dollars a year means
————
30

a lot to my family. If we had this money, it would help us reach
our goal of paying off our personal debt in two years’ time.” After
that, Steven and Josefina want to start saving for Lianna’s college
education.
My attitude is, government should never stand in the way of
families achieving their dreams. And as we debate this issue,
always remember, the surplus is not the government’s money, the
surplus is the people’s money.
For lower-income families, my tax plan restores basic fairness.
Right now, complicated tax rules punish hard work. A waitress
supporting two children on $25,000 a year can lose nearly half of
every additional dollar she earns above the $25,000. Her overtime,
her hardest hours, are taxed at nearly 20 percent. This sends a
terrible message: you’ll never get ahead. But America’s message
must be different. We must honor hard work, never punish it.
With tax relief, overtime will no longer be over-taxed time for the
waitress. People with the smallest incomes will get the highest
percentage of reductions. And millions of additional American
families will be removed from the income tax rolls entirely.
Tax relief is right and tax relief is urgent. The long economic
expansion that began almost 10 years ago is faltering. Lower
interest rates will eventually help, but we cannot assume they will
do the job all by themselves.
Forty years ago, and then 20 years ago, two Presidents, one
Democrat, one Republican, John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan,
advocated tax cuts to, in President Kennedy’s words, get this
country moving again. They knew then what we must do now. To
create economic growth and opportunity, we must put money back
into the hands of the people who buy goods and create jobs.
We must act quickly. The Chairman of the Federal Reserve
has testified before Congress that tax cuts often come too late
to stimulate economic recovery. So I want to work with you to
give our economy an important jump-start by making tax relief
retroactive.
We must act now because it is the right thing to do. We must also
————
31

act now because we have other things to do. We must show courage
to confront and resolve tough challenges, to restructure our nation’s
defenses, to meet our growing need for energy, and to reform
Medicare and Social Security.
America has a window of opportunity to extend and secure our
present peace by promoting a distinctly American internationalism.
We will work with our allies and friends to be a force for good and a
champion of freedom. We will work for free markets, free trade and
freedom from oppression. Nations making progress toward freedom
will find America is their friend. We will promote our values. We
will promote the peace. And we need a strong military to keep the
peace.
But our military was shaped to confront the challenges of the
past. So I’ve asked the Secretary of Defense to review America’s
Armed Forces and prepare to transform them to meet emerging
threats. My budget makes a down payment on the research
and development that will be required. Yet, in our broader
transformation effort, we must put strategy first, then spending.
Our defense vision will drive our defense budget, not the other way
around.
Our nation also needs a clear strategy to confront the threats
of the 21st century — threats that are more widespread and less
certain. They range from terrorists who threaten with bombs to
tyrants in rogue nations intent upon developing weapons of mass
destruction. To protect our own people, our allies and friends, we
must develop and we must deploy effective missile defenses.
And as we transform our military, we can discard Cold War
relics, and reduce our own nuclear forces to reflect today’s needs. A
strong America is the world’s best hope for peace and freedom.
Yet the cause of freedom rests on more than our ability to defend
ourselves and our allies. Freedom is exported every day, as we ship
goods and products that improve the lives of millions of people.
Free trade brings greater political and personal freedom. Each of the
previous five Presidents has had the ability to negotiate far reaching
trade agreements. Tonight I ask you to give me the strong hand of
————
32

presidential trade promotion authority, and to do so quickly.
As we meet tonight, many citizens are struggling with the high
cost of energy. We have a serious energy problem that demands a
national energy policy. The West is confronting a major energy
shortage that has resulted in high prices and uncertainty. I’ve asked
federal agencies to work with California officials to help speed
construction of new energy sources, and I have direct Vice President
Cheney, Commerce Secretary Evans, Energy Secretary Abraham
and other senior members in my administration to develop a
national energy policy.
Our energy demand outstrips our supply. We can produce more
energy at home while protecting our environment, and we must. We
can produce more electricity to meet demand, and we must. We can
promote alternative energy sources and conservation, and we must.
America must become more energy-independent, and we will.
Perhaps the biggest test of our foresight and courage will be
reforming Medicare and Social Security. Medicare’s finances
are strained and its coverage is outdated. Ninety-nine percent of
employer-provided health plans offer some form of prescription
drug coverage; Medicare does not. The framework for reform has
been developed by Senators Frist and Breaux and Congressman
Thomas, and now is the time to act.
Medicare must be modernized, and we must make sure that
every senior on Medicare can choose a health care plan that offers
prescription drugs.
Seven years from now, the baby boom generation will begin to
claim Social Security benefits. Every one in this chamber knows
that Social Security is not prepared to fully fund their retirement.
And we only have a couple of years to get prepared. Without
reform, this country will one day awaken to a stark choice: either a
drastic rise in payroll taxes or a radical cut in retirement benefits.
There is a better way. This spring I will form a presidential
commission to reform Social Security. The commission will make
its recommendations by next fall. Reform should be based on these
principles: It must preserve the benefits of all current retirees and
————
33

those nearing retirement. It must return Social Security to sound
financial footing. And it must offer personal savings accounts to
younger workers who want them.
Social Security now offers workers a return of less than 2 percent
on the money they pay into the system. To save the system, we must
increase that by allowing younger workers to make safe, sound
investments that yield a higher rate of return. Ownership, access
to wealth and independence should not be the privilege of the few.
They are the hope of every American, and we must make them the
foundation of Social Security.
By confronting the tough challenge of reform, by being
responsible with our budget, we can earn the trust of the American
people. And we can add to that trust by enacting fair and balanced
election and campaign reforms.
The agenda I have set before you tonight is worthy of a great
nation. America is a nation at peace, but not a nation at rest.
Much has been given to us, and much is expected. Let us agree
to bridge old divides. But let us also agree that our goodwill must
be dedicated to great goals. Bipartisan is more than minding our
matters. It is doing our duty.
No one can speak in this Capitol and not be awed by its history.
As so many turning points, debates in these chambers have reflected
the collected or divided conscience of our country. And when
we walk through Statuary Hall and see those men and women of
marble, we’re reminded of their courage and achievement.
Yet America’s purpose is never found only in statues or history.
America’s purpose always stands before us. Our generation must
show courage in a time of blessing, as our nation has always
shown in times of crisis. And our courage, issue by issue, can
gather to greatness and serve our country. This is the privilege and
responsibility we share. And if we work together, we can prove that
public service is noble.
We all came here for a reason. We all have things we want to
accomplish and promises to keep. Juntos podemos — together we
can.
————
34

We can make Americans proud of their government. Together
we can share in the credit of making our country more prosperous
and generous and just, and earn from our conscience and from our
fellow citizens the highest possible praise: Well done, good and
faithful servants.
Thank you all. Good night and God bless.
Your Excellency, thank you very much. You will be pleased to
hear, my mother is still telling me what to do. And I’m listening
most of the time.
Cardinal Maida, thank you for your vision, and thank you
for your smile. What a great smile. Cardinal Szocha, thank you
very much for your hospitality and, Cardinal McCarrick, let me
congratulate you on becoming a cardinal last month. Though we’re
both new to our jobs, I’m the only one who is term-limited.
I may be just passing through and I may not be a parishioner,
but I’m proud to live in your archdiocese. I’m pleased to join with
all the church leaders and special guests here today to dedicate the
cultural center. It is my high honor to be here.
When Cardinal Wojtyla spoke here at Catholic University in
1976, few imagined the course his life would take, or the history his
life would shape. In 1978, most of the world knew him only as the
Polish Pope. There were signs of something different and deeper.
One journalist, after hearing the new Pope’s first blessing in St.
Peter’s Square wired back to his editors: “This is not a pope from
Poland, this is a pope from Galilee.” From that day to this, the
Pope’s life has written one of the great inspiring stories of our time.
We remember the Pope’s first visit to Poland in 1979 when faith
turned into resistance and began the swift collapse of imperial
communism. The gentle, young priests, once ordered into forced
labor by Nazis, became the foe of tyranny and a witness to hope.
The last leader of the Soviet Union would call him “the highest
moral authority on earth.” We remember his visit to a prison,
comforting the man who shot him. By answering violence with
forgiveness, the Pope became a symbol of reconciliation.
————
37

We remember the Pope’s visit to Manila in 1995, speaking to
one of the largest crowds in history, more than 5 million men and
women and children. We remember that as a priest 50 years ago, he
traveled by horse-cart to teach the children of small villages. Now
he’s kissed the ground of 123 countries and leads a flock of 1 billion
into the Third Millennium.
We remember the Pope’s visit to Israel and his mission of
reconciliation and mutual respect between Christians and Jews. He
is the first modern Pope to enter a synagogue or visit an Islamic
country. He has always combined the practice of tolerance with a
passion for truth.
John Paul, himself, has often said, “In the designs of Providence,
there are no mere coincidences.” And maybe the reason this man
became Pope is that he bears the message our world needs to hear.
To the poor, sick and dying he carries a message of dignity and
solidarity with their suffering. Even when they are forgotten by
men, he reminds them they are never forgotten by God.
“Do not give in to despair,” he said, “in the South Bronx. God
has your lives and His care, goes with you, calls you to better
things, calls you to overcome.”
To the wealthy, this Pope carries the message that wealth alone
is a false comfort. The goods of the world, he teaches, are nothing
without goodness. We are called, each and every one of us, not only
to make our own way, but to ease the path of others.
To those with power, the Pope carries a message of justice and
human rights. And that message has caused dictators to fear and to
fall. His is not the power of armies or technology or wealth. It is the
unexpected power of a baby in a stable, of a man on a cross, of a
simple fisherman who carried a message of hope to Rome.
Pope John Paul II brings that message of liberation to every
corner of the world. When he arrived in Cuba in 1998, he was
greeted by signs that read, “Fidel is the Revolution!”. But as the
Pope’s biographer put it, “In the next four days Cuba belonged to
another revolutionary.” We are confident that the revolution of hope
the Pope began in that nation will bear fruit in our time.
————
38

And we’re responsible to stand for human dignity and religious
freedom wherever they are denied, from Cuba to China to Southern
Sudan. And we, in our country, must not ignore the words the Pope
addresses to us. On his four pilgrimages to America, he has spoken
with wisdom and feeling about our strengths and our flaws, our
successes and our needs.
The Pope reminds us that while freedom defines our nation,
responsibility must define our lives. He challenges us to live
up to our aspirations, to be a fair and just society where all are
welcomed, all are valued, and all are protected. And he is never
more eloquent than when he speaks for a culture of life. The culture
of life is a welcoming culture, never excluding, never dividing,
never despairing and always affirming the goodness of life in all its
seasons.
In the culture of life we must make room for the stranger.
We must comfort the sick. We must care for the aged. We must
welcome the immigrant. We must teach our children to be gentle
with one another. We must defend in love the innocent child waiting
to be born.
The center we dedicate today celebrates the Pope’s message, its
comfort and its challenge. This place stands for the dignity of the
human person, the value of every life and the splendor of truth. And,
above all, it stands, in the Pope’s words, for the “joy of faith in a
troubled world.”
I’m grateful that Pope John Paul II chose Washington as the site
of this center. It brings honor and it fills a need. We are thankful
for the message. We are also thankful for the messenger, for his
personal warmth and prophetic strength; for his good humor and his
bracing honesty; for his spiritual and intellectual gifts; for his moral
courage, tested against tyranny and against our own complacency.
Always, the Pope points us to the things that last and the love
that saves. We thank God for this rare man, a servant of God and
a hero of history. And I thank all of you for building this center of
conscience and reflection in our Nation’s Capital.
God bless.

Thank you very much. Kelly, thank you very much for that
kind introduction. It’s an honor for me to be here. Tom, thank you
for opening up this fantastic facility. I am thrilled to know that some
of my former governors are with members of the chambers in their
respective states, and I want to say hello to them. I thank all those
who are tuning in. It’s kind of nice to be able to speak to so many
folks in so many cities without having to fire up Air Force One.
I’m especially honored to be able to speak to the folks who really
help our economy grow, the entrepreneurs, the business folks of
America, the employers, the risk takers, the people who really work
hard to realize the great America Dream.
As Kelly said, this is tax day. All across America, husbands and
wives spent last weekend side-by-side at the kitchen table, trying to
finish their 1040s. You have to say this for the income tax, it tends
to bring families together.
The Internal Revenue Service asks our families in America a lot
of questions: how much did you earn; did you move last year; how
big is your mortgage payment. You know, the truth of the matter
is, the IRS knows more about us than our neighbors do. In a lot of
cases, they know more about us than our families do.
But while the tax system knows a lot about our citizens, there’s
a lot our citizens may not know about our tax system. In 2001, the
federal government will take a bigger share of the U.S. economy in
taxes than in any year since 1944. And I remind you, in 1944, we
had 11.5 million people under arms.
The federal government will take more as a percentage of the
national economy this year than it did during World War II, except
for one year; more than any year of the Vietnam War or the Korean
————
41

conflict; more than it took to win World War I or prevail in the Cold
War.
Our country is at peace, but our government is charging wartime
prices. Enough is enough. The American people deserve tax relief.
You often hear it said, we cannot afford tax relief. But even
after adjusting for inflation, the U.S. government will collect twice
as much income tax revenue in 2001 as it did in 1981. Enough is
enough, folks. It’s time to give our folks some tax relief in America.
During the budget debates in Washington, some members of
Congress complained that they did not have enough money to
spend, but in 2001 the income tax will yield $2 billion in revenues
for each and every one of the 535 members of Congress. I think
they should be able to get by on that. Even the senators. No,
enough’s enough. People in America deserve tax relief.
Thanks to the help of a lot of folks here and all around the
country, tax relief is on the way. The American taxpayer won
some important victories a couple of weeks ago. The House of
Representatives voted in favor of a plan that I think is an important
plan, $1.6 trillion in tax relief over the next 10 years. The Senate
approved most of my tax plan, but wants the government to spend
far more.
Some members of the Senate are, unfortunately, proving the
point I make all across the country — if you send it, they will
spend it. Federal discretionary spending rose by 8 percent in 2001.
The Senate has just voted to increase the discretionary spending
by another 8 percent in 2002. At that rate, federal discretionary
spending will double by 2010. Think about that. If we keep
spending at the pace the Senate wants, in only nine years’ time,
government operations will cost twice as much as they do today.
Now, senators are in their home states this week listening to the
taxpayers. I hope Americans will send a clear message: excessive
federal spending threatens economic vitality. What we want is a
stronger economy, not larger federal government.
There’s a better way: increase discretionary spending by a
moderate
————
42

and responsible 4 percent — by the way, at a rate larger than
inflation — and then reduces — and then reduce taxes for everyone
who pays taxes.
My plan does not puncture the tax code with loopholes. It
doesn’t give special treatment to special interests. My plan targets
only one interest, the public interest. It directs help to individuals
and families and small businesses. It is a plan for real people, and it
will help produce real prosperity.
Let me tell you a little bit about what tax relief means for
American families. My plan, when fully implemented, returns
about $1,600 to the typical family of four. Sixteen-hundred dollars
pays the typical mortgage for more than a month. Sixteen-hundred
dollars will buy the typical family nearly three months worth of
groceries. Sixteen-hundred dollars will fuel two cars for a year.
There are a lot of American mothers and dads who wake up in
America today anxious over bills they have to pay. Their worries
don’t get any easier when the federal government takes more of
their income in taxes than they pay for food, shelter and clothing.
For families with children to raise and debts to pay, tax relief will
lift burdens and ease worries.
For small businesses, tax relief means more customers and
improved cash flow, more money to hire more workers, more
money to expand benefits, more money to invest in new technology.
Tax relief will create new jobs. Tax relief will generate new wealth.
And tax relief will open new opportunities.
If you read some of the news accounts of this budget debate,
if you listen to what some of the members of Congress say, you’d
think that little of value can ever happen in America unless the
government makes it happen. You’d think that when we return
money to the taxpayers it evaporates into the air.
Let me tell you some of the things $1.6 trillion could mean to
the private economy. It could buy 10 million new middle income
homes. It could pay the tuitions of 26 million young people at a
private college or university for four years each. It could purchase
76 million new automobiles. These are the kinds of things
————
43

Americans do with their own money. And there are many others.
Just ask Tommy and Sharen Winfield, for example. They’re
watching via closed circuit here from Atlanta, Georgia. The
Winfields have three children. Tommy has been working as an
operating engineer at Children’s Hospital of Atlanta for the past
three years. They pay $1,380 in federal income taxes. Under my
plan, they’d pay nothing.
I first met Tommy a few weeks ago, and we were having a
round-table discussion about tax relief. I asked him whether he
thought the relief would make a difference to his family — you see,
there are some who say, $1,380, that’s nothing, that’s not enough
money for anybody.
But let me tell you what Tommy said loud and clear, and I hope
the members of the United States Congress hear it. Tommy said,
sir, if they don’t believe you — meaning, whether or not tax relief
means anything then they should just ask me. One thousand three
hundred and eighty dollars means a lot to Tommy. It means a lot to a
lot of folks in America: those who are struggling with higher energy
bills, because we hadn’t had an energy policy; those who have got
big credit card debts.
We’ve got the Brake family with us from Alexandria, Virginia,
Kelly and Pam. One less son. They pay $4,000 in federal income
tax. Under my plan, they will save $1,700. That’s real money for
this hard-working couple. They and their two sons, I can assure
you, will find good use for that tax relief. And whatever they do, I
strongly believe they will spend it better and more productively than
the federal government can.
This is an important debate for our country. It’s a debate about
how to make sure our economy continues to grow. But it’s really a
debate about who do we trust. Who do those of us who have been
honored to serve our country at the federal level, who do we trust
with the people’s money? Do we trust our government, or do we
trust the people? I believe after we meet priorities — and we meet
priorities by growing the discretionary budget by 4 percent — that
we always have got to remember whose money it is we’re talking
————
44

about. It’s not the government’s money, it’s the people’s money.
And we’ve always got to remember, the role of government
is not to create wealth. It’s to create an environment in which the
entrepreneur can flourish, in which the small business can grow to
become a big business. That’s the role of government. And that’s
why it’s vital at this point in American history that we return money
back to the people. Instead of returning money, we ought not to take
it in the first place, with real meaningful tax relief.
I’ve learned that the people can make a big difference in a lot of
debates, particularly the tax relief debate. We’re making some pretty
good progress. I saw a good Democrat Senator out of Georgia, the
other day. Max Cleland said that he is interested in — when he
comes back, interested in supporting the $1.6 trillion plan. I think
that’s what he said. It certainly sounded like it to me. And that’s a
good sign. I appreciate the Senator going home and listening to the
people.
You see, I think we’ve finally made the case that we can meet the
obligations of the federal government, that we don’t have to grow
at 8 percent in order to meet obligations. We’ve also made the case
that sending money back to the people is important for our economy
and important for the American Dream. And I want to thank your
help for it.
I want to invite all Americans to take a look at the budget
plan, themselves. You can order the little book by calling 202-5121800, and ask for the Citizen’s Guide to the Federal Budget. Or you
can download it for free at www.whitehouse.gov.
It’s important for you to follow your government closely. It’s
important for you to not let the filter decide what’s reality and
what’s not reality. It’s important to get the facts. And it’s always
important to understand that tax relief will stimulate creativity and
enterprise for individual Americans.
I firmly believe tax relief means a better life in a more
prosperous America. So let the members of Congress know when
they come back that you’re watching, that you care for what they do
because it will affect your life in a positive way.
————
45

I can’t thank you all enough for your support, and I can’t thank
you enough for letting me come by and make my case. God bless
you all.
Members of Congress, members of my Cabinet, Ambassador
Ivry, Elie Wiesel, Benjamin Meed and other survivors, Rabbi
Greenberg and Dr. Mandel, ladies and gentlemen: Laura and I thank
you for asking us to join you on this Day of Remembrance.
Some days are set aside to recall the great and hopeful moments
of human experience. Other days, like today, we turn our minds
to painful events. In doing so, we honor the courage and suffering
of martyrs and heroes. We also seek the wisdom and courage to
prevent future tragedies and future evils.
World War II ended and camps were liberated before many of
us were born. The events we recall today have the safe distance
of history. And there will come a time when the eye-witnesses are
gone. And that is why we are bound by conscience to remember
what happened, and to whom it happened.
During the war, a Nazi guard told Simon Wiesenthal that in time
no one would believe his account of what he saw. Evil on so grand a
scale would seem incredible. Yet, we do not just believe, we know.
We know because the evidence has been kept, the record has been
preserved.
It is fitting to remember the Holocaust under the dome of our
Nation’s Capital, with members of the United States Congress who
are here. Some members had relatives among the victims. Some
of you played a part in the liberation of Europe. One Congressman
here today fought in the underground, and he, himself, was put into
forced labor by the Nazis. We are honored by the presence of the
gentleman from California, Tom Lantos.
We remember at the Capitol because the United States has
accepted a special role; we strive to be a refuge for the persecuted.
We are called by history and by conscience to defend the oppressed.
————
47

Our country stands on watch for the rise of tyranny, and history’s
worst tyrants have always reserved a special hatred for the Jewish
people. Tyrants and dictators will accept no other gods before them.
They require disobedience to the First Commandment. They seek
absolute control and are threatened by faith in God. They fear only
the power they cannot possess, the power of truth.
So they resent the living example of the devout, especially the
devotion of a unique people, chosen by God. Through centuries
of struggle, Jews across the world have been witnesses not only
against the crimes of men, but for faith in God, and God alone.
Theirs is a story of defiance and oppression, and patience and
tribulation, reaching back to the Exodus and their exile. That story
continued in the founding of the state of Israel. That story continues
in the defense of the state of Israel.
When we remember the Holocaust and to whom it happened, we
also must remember where it happened. It didn’t happen in some
remote or unfamiliar place; it happened right in the middle of the
Western world. Trains carrying men, women, and children in cattle
cars departed from Paris and Vienna, Frankfurt and Warsaw. And
the orders came not from crude and uneducated men, but from men
who regard themselves as cultured and well-schooled, modern and
even forward-looking. They had all the outward traits of cultured
men — except for conscience.
Their crimes show the world that evil can slip in and blend in,
amid the most civilized of surroundings. In the end, only conscience
can stop it, and moral discernment and decency and tolerance.
These can never be assured in any time or in any society. They must
always be taught.
Yesterday I had the honor of visiting the United States Holocaust
Memorial Museum, surrounded by the familiar buildings and
symbols of our democratic government. Outside the museum are
expressions of the best of mankind’s earthly aspirations; inside are
images realized of the worst possibilities of the human mind, the
attempted elimination of a people and the millions more targeted for
destruction. The pictures, the clothes, the toys all tell of genocide —
————
48

our word for 6 million acts of murder.
This Day of Remembrance marks more than a single historic
tragedy, but 6 million important lives — all the possibilities, all the
dreams, and all the innocence that died with them.
The Holocaust is defined as much by the courage of the lost as
by the cruelty of the guilty. As Victor Frankel observed, man is that
being who invented the gas chambers of Auschwitz. However, he’s
also the being who entered those chambers upright, with the Lord’s
Prayer or Shema Israel on his lips. When all the crimes are finished,
the fears realized and the cries silenced, that was the hope that
remained — to be remembered by the living and raised up by the
living God. God bless.

Good evening. I appreciate you giving me a few minutes of your
time tonight so I can discuss with you a complex and difficult issue,
an issue that is one of the most profound of our time.
The issue of research involving stem cells derived from human
embryos is increasingly the subject of a national debate and dinner
table discussions. The issue is confronted every day in laboratories
as scientists ponder the ethical ramifications of their work. It is
agonized over by parents and many couples as they try to have
children, or to save children already born.
The issue is debated within the church, with people of different
faiths, even many of the same faith coming to different conclusions.
Many people are finding that the more they know about stem cell
research, the less certain they are about the right ethical and moral
conclusions.
My administration must decide whether to allow federal funds,
your tax dollars, to be used for scientific research on stem cells
derived from human embryos. A large number of these embryos
already exist. They are the product of a process called in vitro
fertilization, which helps so many couples conceive children. When
doctors match sperm and egg to create life outside the womb, they
usually produce more embryos than are planted in the mother. Once
a couple successfully has children, or if they are unsuccessful, the
additional embryos remain frozen in laboratories.
Some will not survive during long storage; others are destroyed.
A number have been donated to science and used to create privately
funded stem cell lines. And a few have been implanted in an
adoptive mother and born, and are today healthy children.
Based on preliminary work that has been privately funded,
scientists believe further research using stem cells offers great
————
51

promise that could help improve the lives of those who suffer from
many terrible diseases — from juvenile diabetes to Alzheimer’s,
from Parkinson’s to spinal cord injuries. And while scientists
admit they are not yet certain, they believe stem cells derived from
embryos have unique potential.
You should also know that stem cells can be derived from
sources other than embryos — from adult cells, from umbilical
cords that are discarded after babies are born, from human placenta.
And many scientists feel research on these type of stem cells is also
promising. Many patients suffering from a range of diseases are
already being helped with treatments developed from adult stem
cells.
However, most scientists, at least today, believe that research on
embryonic stem cells offer the most promise because these cells
have the potential to develop in all of the tissues in the body.
Scientists further believe that rapid progress in this research will
come only with federal funds. Federal dollars help attract the best
and brightest scientists. They ensure new discoveries are widely
shared at the largest number of research facilities and that the
research is directed toward the greatest public good.
The United States has a long and proud record of leading the
world toward advances in science and medicine that improve
human life. And the United States has a long and proud record of
upholding the highest standards of ethics as we expand the limits
of science and knowledge. Research on embryonic stem cells
raises profound ethical questions, because extracting the stem cell
destroys the embryo, and thus destroys its potential for life. Like a
snowflake, each of these embryos is unique, with the unique genetic
potential of an individual human being.
As I thought through this issue, I kept returning to two
fundamental questions: First, are these frozen embryos human life,
and therefore, something precious to be protected? And second, if
they’re going to be destroyed anyway, shouldn’t they be used for a
greater good, for research that has the potential to save and improve
other lives?
————
52

I’ve asked those questions and others of scientists, scholars,
bioethicists, religious leaders, doctors, researchers, members
of Congress, my Cabinet, and my friends. I have read heartfelt
letters from many Americans. I have given this issue a great deal
of thought, prayer and considerable reflection. And I have found
widespread disagreement.
On the first issue, are these embryos human life — well, one
researcher told me he believes this five-day-old cluster of cells is
not an embryo, not yet an individual, but a pre-embryo. He argued
that it has the potential for life, but it is not a life because it cannot
develop on its own.
An ethicist dismissed that as a callous attempt at rationalization.
Make no mistake, he told me, that cluster of cells is the same way
you and I, and all the rest of us, started our lives. One goes with a
heavy heart if we use these, he said, because we are dealing with the
seeds of the next generation.
And to the other crucial question, if these are going to be
destroyed anyway, why not use them for good purpose — I also
found different answers. Many argue these embryos are byproducts
of a process that helps create life, and we should allow couples to
donate them to science so they can be used for good purpose instead
of wasting their potential. Others will argue there’s no such thing as
excess life, and the fact that a living being is going to die does not
justify experimenting on it or exploiting it as a natural resource.
At its core, this issue forces us to confront fundamental questions
about the beginnings of life and the ends of science. It lies at a
difficult moral intersection, juxtaposing the need to protect life in all
its phases with the prospect of saving and improving life in all its
stages.
As the discoveries of modern science create tremendous hope,
they also lay vast ethical mine fields. As the genius of science
extends the horizons of what we can do, we increasingly confront
complex questions about what we should do. We have arrived at
that brave new world that seemed so distant in 1932, when Aldous
Huxley wrote about human beings created in test tubes in what he
————
53

called a “hatchery.”
In recent weeks, we learned that scientists have created human
embryos in test tubes solely to experiment on them. This is deeply
troubling, and a warning sign that should prompt all of us to think
through these issues very carefully.
Embryonic stem cell research is at the leading edge of a series of
moral hazards. The initial stem cell researcher was at first reluctant
to begin his research, fearing it might be used for human cloning.
Scientists have already cloned a sheep. Researchers are telling us
the next step could be to clone human beings to create individual
designer stem cells, essentially to grow another you, to be available
in case you need another heart or lung or liver.
I strongly oppose human cloning, as do most Americans. We
recoil at the idea of growing human beings for spare body parts,
or creating life for our convenience. And while we must devote
enormous energy to conquering disease, it is equally important that
we pay attention to the moral concerns raised by the new frontier of
human embryo stem cell research. Even the most noble ends do not
justify any means.
My position on these issues is shaped by deeply held beliefs.
I’m a strong supporter of science and technology, and believe they
have the potential for incredible good — to improve lives, to save
life, to conquer disease. Research offers hope that millions of our
loved ones may be cured of a disease and rid of their suffering. I
have friends whose children suffer from juvenile diabetes. Nancy
Reagan has written me about President Reagan’s struggle with
Alzheimer’s. My own family has confronted the tragedy of
childhood leukemia. And, like all Americans, I have great hope for
cures.
I also believe human life is a sacred gift from our Creator.
I worry about a culture that devalues life, and believe as your
President I have an important obligation to foster and encourage
respect for life in America and throughout the world. And while
we’re all hopeful about the potential of this research, no one can be
certain that the science will live up to the hope it has generated.
————
54

Eight years ago, scientists believed fetal tissue research offered
great hope for cures and treatments — yet, the progress to date has
not lived up to its initial expectations. Embryonic stem cell research
offers both great promise and great peril. So I have decided we
must proceed with great care.
As a result of private research, more than 60 genetically diverse
stem cell lines already exist. They were created from embryos that
have already been destroyed, and they have the ability to regenerate
themselves indefinitely, creating ongoing opportunities for research.
I have concluded that we should allow federal funds to be used for
research on these existing stem cell lines, where the life and death
decision has already been made.
Leading scientists tell me research on these 60 lines has great
promise that could lead to breakthrough therapies and cures. This
allows us to explore the promise and potential of stem cell research
without crossing a fundamental moral line, by providing taxpayer
funding that would sanction or encourage further destruction of
human embryos that have at least the potential for life.
I also believe that great scientific progress can be made through
aggressive federal funding of research on umbilical cord placenta,
adult and animal stem cells which do not involve the same moral
dilemma. This year, your government will spend $250 million on
this important research.
I will also name a President’s council to monitor stem cell
research, to recommend appropriate guidelines and regulations,
and to consider all of the medical and ethical ramifications of
biomedical innovation. This council will consist of leading
scientists, doctors, ethicists, lawyers, theologians and others, and
will be chaired by Dr. Leon Kass, a leading biomedical ethicist from
the University of Chicago.
This council will keep us apprised of new developments and
give our nation a forum to continue to discuss and evaluate these
important issues. As we go forward, I hope we will always be
guided by both intellect and heart, by both our capabilities and our
conscience.
————
55

I have made this decision with great care, and I pray it is the
right one.
Thank you for listening. Good night, and God bless America.

————
56

Good evening. Today, our fellow citizens, our way of life, our
very freedom came under attack in a series of deliberate and deadly
terrorist acts. The victims were in airplanes, or in their offices;
secretaries, businessmen and women, military and federal workers;
moms and dads, friends and neighbors. Thousands of lives were
suddenly ended by evil, despicable acts of terror.
The pictures of airplanes flying into buildings, fires burning,
huge structures collapsing, have filled us with disbelief, terrible
sadness, and a quiet, unyielding anger. These acts of mass murder
were intended to frighten our nation into chaos and retreat. But they
have failed; our country is strong.
A great people has been moved to defend a great nation. Terrorist
attacks can shake the foundations of our biggest buildings, but they
cannot touch the foundation of America. These acts shattered steel,
but they cannot dent the steel of American resolve.
America was targeted for attack because we’re the brightest
beacon for freedom and opportunity in the world. And no one will
keep that light from shining.
Today, our nation saw evil, the very worst of human nature. And
we responded with the best of America — with the daring of our
rescue workers, with the caring for strangers and neighbors who
came to give blood and help in any way they could.
Immediately following the first attack, I implemented our
government’s emergency response plans. Our military is powerful,
and it’s prepared. Our emergency teams are working in New York
City and Washington, D.C. to help with local rescue efforts.
Our first priority is to get help to those who have been injured,
and to take every precaution to protect our citizens at home and
around the world from further attacks.
————
57

The functions of our government continue without interruption.
Federal agencies in Washington which had to be evacuated today
are reopening for essential personnel tonight, and will be open for
business tomorrow. Our financial institutions remain strong, and the
American economy will be open for business, as well.
The search is underway for those who are behind these evil acts.
I’ve directed the full resources of our intelligence and law
enforcement communities to find those responsible and to bring
them to justice. We will make no distinction between the terrorists
who committed these acts and those who harbor them.
I appreciate so very much the members of Congress who have
joined me in strongly condemning these attacks. And on behalf of
the American people, I thank the many world leaders who have
called to offer their condolences and assistance.
America and our friends and allies join with all those who want
peace and security in the world, and we stand together to win the
war against terrorism. Tonight, I ask for your prayers for all those
who grieve, for the children whose worlds have been shattered, for
all whose sense of safety and security has been threatened. And
I pray they will be comforted by a power greater than any of us,
spoken through the ages in Psalm 23: “Even though I walk through
the valley of the shadow of death, I fear no evil, for You are with
me.”
This is a day when all Americans from every walk of life unite in
our resolve for justice and peace. America has stood down enemies
before, and we will do so this time. None of us will ever forget this
day. Yet, we go forward to defend freedom and all that is good and
just in our world.
Thank you. Good night, and God bless America.

We are here in the middle hour of our grief. So many have
suffered so great a loss, and today we express our nation’s sorrow.
We come before God to pray for the missing and the dead, and for
those who love them.
On Tuesday, our country was attacked with deliberate and
massive cruelty. We have seen the images of fire and ashes, and
bent steel.
Now come the names, the list of casualties we are only
beginning to read. They are the names of men and women who
began their day at a desk or in an airport, busy with life. They are
the names of people who faced death, and in their last moments
called home to say, be brave, and I love you.
They are the names of passengers who defied their murderers,
and prevented the murder of others on the ground. They are the
names of men and women who wore the uniform of the United
States, and died at their posts.
They are the names of rescuers, the ones whom death found
running up the stairs and into the fires to help others. We will read
all these names. We will linger over them, and learn their stories,
and many Americans will weep.
To the children and parents and spouses and families and friends
of the lost, we offer the deepest sympathy of the nation. And I
assure you, you are not alone.
Just three days removed from these events, Americans do not
yet have the distance of history. But our responsibility to history is
already clear: to answer these attacks and rid the world of evil.
War has been waged against us by stealth and deceit and murder.
This nation is peaceful, but fierce when stirred to anger. This
conflict was begun on the timing and terms of others. It will end in
————
59

a way, and at an hour, of our choosing.
Our purpose as a nation is firm. Yet our wounds as a people are
recent and unhealed, and lead us to pray. In many of our prayers
this week, there is a searching, and an honesty. At St. Patrick’s
Cathedral in New York on Tuesday, a woman said, “I prayed to God
to give us a sign that He is still here.” Others have prayed for the
same, searching hospital to hospital, carrying pictures of those still
missing.
God’s signs are not always the ones we look for. We learn in
tragedy that his purposes are not always our own. Yet the prayers
of private suffering, whether in our homes or in this great cathedral,
are known and heard, and understood.
There are prayers that help us last through the day, or endure
the night. There are prayers of friends and strangers, that give us
strength for the journey. And there are prayers that yield our will to
a will greater than our own.
This world He created is of moral design. Grief and tragedy and
hatred are only for a time. Goodness, remembrance, and love have
no end. And the Lord of life holds all who die, and all who mourn.
It is said that adversity introduces us to ourselves. This is true of
a nation as well. In this trial, we have been reminded, and the
world has seen, that our fellow Americans are generous and kind,
resourceful and brave. We see our national character in rescuers
working past exhaustion; in long lines of blood donors; in thousands
of citizens who have asked to work and serve in any way possible.
And we have seen our national character in eloquent acts of
sacrifice. Inside the World Trade Center, one man who could have
saved himself stayed until the end at the side of his quadriplegic
friend. A beloved priest died giving the last rites to a firefighter.
Two office workers, finding a disabled stranger, carried her down
sixty-eight floors to safety. A group of men drove through the night
from Dallas to Washington to bring skin grafts for burn victims.
In these acts, and in many others, Americans showed a deep
commitment to one another, and an abiding love for our country.
Today, we feel what Franklin Roosevelt called the warm courage of
————
60

national unity. This is a unity of every faith, and every background.
It has joined together political parties in both houses of
Congress. It is evident in services of prayer and candlelight vigils,
and American flags, which are displayed in pride, and wave in
defiance.
Our unity is a kinship of grief, and a steadfast resolve to prevail
against our enemies. And this unity against terror is now extending
across the world.
America is a nation full of good fortune, with so much to be
grateful for. But we are not spared from suffering. In every
generation, the world has produced enemies of human freedom.
They have attacked America, because we are freedom’s home and
defender. And the commitment of our fathers is now the calling of
our time.
On this national day of prayer and remembrance, we ask
almighty God to watch over our nation, and grant us patience and
resolve in all that is to come. We pray that He will comfort and
console those who now walk in sorrow. We thank Him for each life
we now must mourn, and the promise of a life to come.
As we have been assured, neither death nor life, nor angels
nor principalities nor powers, nor things present nor things to come,
nor height nor depth, can separate us from God’s love. May He
bless the souls of the departed. May He comfort our own. And may
He always guide our country.
God bless America.
I can’t talk any louder.
I want you all to know that America today — that America today
is on bended knee in prayer for the people whose lives were lost
here, for the workers who work here, for the families who mourn.
This nation stands with the good people of New York City, and New
Jersey and Connecticut, as we mourn the loss of thousands of our
citizens.
I can hear you. I can hear you. The rest of
the world hears you. And the people who knocked these buildings
down will hear all of us soon.
The nation sends its love and compassion to
everybody who is here. Thank you for your hard work. Thank you
for making the nation proud. And may God bless America.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. President Pro Tempore, members of Congress,
and fellow Americans:
In the normal course of events, Presidents come to this chamber
to report on the state of the Union. Tonight, no such report is
needed. It has already been delivered by the American people.
We have seen it in the courage of passengers, who rushed
terrorists to save others on the ground — passengers like an
exceptional man named Todd Beamer. And would you please help
me to welcome his wife, Lisa Beamer, here tonight.
We have seen the state of our Union in the endurance of rescuers,
working past exhaustion. We have seen the unfurling of flags, the
lighting of candles, the giving of blood, the saying of prayers — in
English, Hebrew, and Arabic. We have seen the decency of a loving
and giving people who have made the grief of strangers their own.
My fellow citizens, for the last nine days, the entire world has
seen for itself the state of our Union — and it is strong.
Tonight we are a country awakened to danger and called to
defend freedom. Our grief has turned to anger, and anger to
resolution. Whether we bring our enemies to justice, or bring
justice to our enemies, justice will be done.
I thank the Congress for its leadership at such an important
time. All of America was touched on the evening of the tragedy
to see Republicans and Democrats joined together on the steps
of this Capitol, singing “God Bless America.” And you did more
than sing; you acted, by delivering $40 billion to rebuild our
communities and meet the needs of our military.
Speaker Hastert, Minority Leader Gephardt, Majority Leader
Daschle and Senator Lott, I thank you for your friendship, for your
leadership and for your service to our country.
————
65

And on behalf of the American people, I thank the world for its
outpouring of support. America will never forget the sounds of our
National Anthem playing at Buckingham Palace, on the streets of
Paris, and at Berlin’s Brandenburg Gate.
We will not forget South Korean children gathering to pray
outside our embassy in Seoul, or the prayers of sympathy offered at
a mosque in Cairo. We will not forget moments of silence and days
of mourning in Australia and Africa and Latin America.
Nor will we forget the citizens of 80 other nations who died
with our own: dozens of Pakistanis; more than 130 Israelis; more
than 250 citizens of India; men and women from El Salvador, Iran,
Mexico and Japan; and hundreds of British citizens. America
has no truer friend than Great Britain. Once again, we are joined
together in a great cause — so honored the British Prime Minister
has crossed an ocean to show his unity of purpose with America.
Thank you for coming, friend.
On September the 11th, enemies of freedom committed an act
of war against our country. Americans have known wars — but
for the past 136 years, they have been wars on foreign soil, except
for one Sunday in 1941. Americans have known the casualties of
war — but not at the center of a great city on a peaceful morning.
Americans have known surprise attacks — but never before on
thousands of civilians. All of this was brought upon us in a single
day — and night fell on a different world, a world where freedom
itself is under attack.
Americans have many questions tonight. Americans are asking:
Who attacked our country? The evidence we have gathered all
points to a collection of loosely affiliated terrorist organizations
known as al Qaeda. They are the same murderers indicted
for bombing American embassies in Tanzania and Kenya, and
responsible for bombing the USS Cole.
Al Qaeda is to terror what the mafia is to crime. But its goal is
not making money; its goal is remaking the world — and imposing
its radical beliefs on people everywhere.
The terrorists practice a fringe form of Islamic extremism that
————
66

has been rejected by Muslim scholars and the vast majority of
Muslim clerics — a fringe movement that perverts the peaceful
teachings of Islam. The terrorists’ directive commands them to kill
Christians and Jews, to kill all Americans, and make no distinction
among military and civilians, including women and children.
This group and its leader — a person named Osama bin Laden
— are linked to many other organizations in different countries,
including the Egyptian Islamic Jihad and the Islamic Movement
of Uzbekistan. There are thousands of these terrorists in more
than 60 countries. They are recruited from their own nations and
neighborhoods and brought to camps in places like Afghanistan,
where they are trained in the tactics of terror. They are sent back to
their homes or sent to hide in countries around the world to plot evil
and destruction.
The leadership of al Qaeda has great influence in Afghanistan
and supports the Taliban regime in controlling most of that country.
In Afghanistan, we see al Qaeda’s vision for the world.
Afghanistan’s people have been brutalized — many are starving
and many have fled. Women are not allowed to attend school. You
can be jailed for owning a television. Religion can be practiced
only as their leaders dictate. A man can be jailed in Afghanistan if
his beard is not long enough.
The United States respects the people of Afghanistan — after
all, we are currently its largest source of humanitarian aid — but
we condemn the Taliban regime. It is not only repressing its own
people, it is threatening people everywhere by sponsoring and
sheltering and supplying terrorists. By aiding and abetting murder,
the Taliban regime is committing murder.
And tonight, the United States of America makes the following
demands on the Taliban: Deliver to United States authorities
all the leaders of al Qaeda who hide in your land. Release all
foreign nationals, including American citizens, you have unjustly
imprisoned. Protect foreign journalists, diplomats and aid workers
in your country. Close immediately and permanently every terrorist
training camp in Afghanistan, and hand over every terrorist, and
————
67

every person in their support structure, to appropriate authorities.
Give the United States full access to terrorist training camps, so we
can make sure they are no longer operating.
These demands are not open to negotiation or discussion. The
Taliban must act, and act immediately. They will hand over the
terrorists, or they will share in their fate.
I also want to speak tonight directly to Muslims throughout the
world. We respect your faith. It’s practiced freely by many millions
of Americans, and by millions more in countries that America
counts as friends. Its teachings are good and peaceful, and those
who commit evil in the name of Allah blaspheme the name of Allah.
The terrorists are traitors to their own faith, trying, in effect, to
hijack Islam itself. The enemy of America is not our many Muslim
friends; it is not our many Arab friends. Our enemy is a radical
network of terrorists, and every government that supports them.
Our war on terror begins with al Qaeda, but it does not end there.
It will not end until every terrorist group of global reach has been
found, stopped and defeated.
Americans are asking, why do they hate us? They hate what
we see right here in this chamber — a democratically elected
government. Their leaders are self-appointed. They hate our
freedoms — our freedom of religion, our freedom of speech, our
freedom to vote and assemble and disagree with each other.
They want to overthrow existing governments in many Muslim
countries, such as Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and Jordan. They want to
drive Israel out of the Middle East. They want to drive Christians
and Jews out of vast regions of Asia and Africa.
These terrorists kill not merely to end lives, but to disrupt and
end a way of life. With every atrocity, they hope that America
grows fearful, retreating from the world and forsaking our friends.
They stand against us, because we stand in their way.
We are not deceived by their pretenses to piety. We have seen
their kind before. They are the heirs of all the murderous ideologies
of the 20th century. By sacrificing human life to serve their radical
visions — by abandoning every value except the will to power —
————
68

they follow in the path of fascism, and Nazism, and totalitarianism.
And they will follow that path all the way, to where it ends: in
history’s unmarked grave of discarded lies.
Americans are asking: How will we fight and win this war?
We will direct every resource at our command — every means
of diplomacy, every tool of intelligence, every instrument of law
enforcement, every financial influence, and every necessary weapon
of war — to the disruption and to the defeat of the global terror
network.
This war will not be like the war against Iraq a decade ago, with
a decisive liberation of territory and a swift conclusion. It will not
look like the air war above Kosovo two years ago, where no ground
troops were used and not a single American was lost in combat.
Our response involves far more than instant retaliation and
isolated strikes. Americans should not expect one battle, but a
lengthy campaign, unlike any other we have ever seen. It may
include dramatic strikes, visible on TV, and covert operations, secret
even in success. We will starve terrorists of funding, turn them
one against another, drive them from place to place, until there is
no refuge or no rest. And we will pursue nations that provide aid
or safe haven to terrorism. Every nation, in every region, now
has a decision to make. Either you are with us, or you are with
the terrorists. From this day forward, any nation that continues to
harbor or support terrorism will be regarded by the United States as
a hostile regime.
Our nation has been put on notice: We are not immune from
attack. We will take defensive measures against terrorism to protect
Americans. Today, dozens of federal departments and agencies, as
well as state and local governments, have responsibilities affecting
homeland security. These efforts must be coordinated at the highest
level. So tonight I announce the creation of a Cabinet-level position
reporting directly to me — the Office of Homeland Security.
And tonight I also announce a distinguished American to lead
this effort, to strengthen American security: a military veteran, an
effective governor, a true patriot, a trusted friend — Pennsylvania’s
————
69

Tom Ridge. He will lead, oversee and coordinate a comprehensive
national strategy to safeguard our country against terrorism, and
respond to any attacks that may come.
These measures are essential. But the only way to defeat
terrorism as a threat to our way of life is to stop it, eliminate it, and
destroy it where it grows.
Many will be involved in this effort, from FBI agents to
intelligence operatives to the reservists we have called to active
duty. All deserve our thanks, and all have our prayers. And tonight,
a few miles from the damaged Pentagon, I have a message for our
military: Be ready. I’ve called the Armed Forces to alert, and there
is a reason. The hour is coming when America will act, and you
will make us proud.
This is not, however, just America’s fight. And what is at stake
is not just America’s freedom. This is the world’s fight. This is
civilization’s fight. This is the fight of all who believe in progress
and pluralism, tolerance and freedom.
We ask every nation to join us. We will ask, and we will need,
the help of police forces, intelligence services, and banking systems
around the world. The United States is grateful that many nations
and many international organizations have already responded —
with sympathy and with support. Nations from Latin America, to
Asia, to Africa, to Europe, to the Islamic world. Perhaps the NATO
Charter reflects best the attitude of the world: An attack on one is
an attack on all.
The civilized world is rallying to America’s side. They
understand that if this terror goes unpunished, their own cities,
their own citizens may be next. Terror, unanswered, can not only
bring down buildings, it can threaten the stability of legitimate
governments. And you know what — we’re not going to allow it.
Americans are asking: What is expected of us? I ask you to live
your lives, and hug your children. I know many citizens have fears
tonight, and I ask you to be calm and resolute, even in the face of a
continuing threat.
I ask you to uphold the values of America, and remember why
————
70

so many have come here. We are in a fight for our principles, and
our first responsibility is to live by them. No one should be singled
out for unfair treatment or unkind words because of their ethnic
background or religious faith.
I ask you to continue to support the victims of this tragedy with
your contributions. Those who want to give can go to a central
source of information, libertyunites.org, to find the names of groups
providing direct help in New York, Pennsylvania, and Virginia.
The thousands of FBI agents who are now at work in this
investigation may need your cooperation, and I ask you to give it.
I ask for your patience, with the delays and inconveniences that
may accompany tighter security; and for your patience in what will
be a long struggle.
I ask your continued participation and confidence in the
American economy. Terrorists attacked a symbol of American
prosperity. They did not touch its source. America is successful
because of the hard work, and creativity, and enterprise of our
people. These were the true strengths of our economy before
September 11th, and they are our strengths today.
And, finally, please continue praying for the victims of terror
and their families, for those in uniform, and for our great country.
Prayer has comforted us in sorrow, and will help strengthen us for
the journey ahead.
Tonight I thank my fellow Americans for what you have already
done and for what you will do. And ladies and gentlemen of the
Congress, I thank you, their representatives, for what you have
already done and for what we will do together. Tonight, we face
new and sudden national challenges. We will come together
to improve air safety, to dramatically expand the number of air
marshals on domestic flights, and take new measures to prevent
hijacking. We will come together to promote stability and keep our
airlines flying, with direct assistance during this emergency.
We will come together to give law enforcement the additional
tools it needs to track down terror here at home. We will come
together to strengthen our intelligence capabilities to know the plans
————
71

of terrorists before they act, and find them before they strike.
We will come together to take active steps that strengthen
America’s economy, and put our people back to work.
Tonight we welcome two leaders who embody the extraordinary
spirit of all New Yorkers: Governor George Pataki, and Mayor
Rudolph Giuliani. As a symbol of America’s resolve, my
administration will work with Congress, and these two leaders, to
show the world that we will rebuild New York City.
After all that has just passed — all the lives taken, and all the
possibilities and hopes that died with them — it is natural to wonder
if America’s future is one of fear. Some speak of an age of terror.
I know there are struggles ahead, and dangers to face. But this
country will define our times, not be defined by them. As long as
the United States of America is determined and strong, this will not
be an age of terror; this will be an age of liberty, here and across the
world.
Great harm has been done to us. We have suffered great loss.
And in our grief and anger we have found our mission and our
moment. Freedom and fear are at war. The advance of human
freedom — the great achievement of our time, and the great hope
of every time — now depends on us. Our nation — this generation
— will lift a dark threat of violence from our people and our future.
We will rally the world to this cause by our efforts, by our courage.
We will not tire, we will not falter, and we will not fail.
It is my hope that in the months and years ahead, life will return
almost to normal. We’ll go back to our lives and routines, and that
is good. Even grief recedes with time and grace. But our resolve
must not pass. Each of us will remember what happened that day,
and to whom it happened. We’ll remember the moment the news
came — where we were and what we were doing. Some will
remember an image of a fire, or a story of rescue. Some will carry
memories of a face and a voice gone forever.
And I will carry this: It is the police shield of a man named
George Howard, who died at the World Trade Center trying to save
others. It was given to me by his mom, Arlene, as a proud memorial
————
72

to her son. This is my reminder of lives that ended, and a task that
does not end.
I will not forget this wound to our country or those who inflicted
it. I will not yield; I will not rest; I will not relent in waging this
struggle for freedom and security for the American people.
The course of this conflict is not known, yet its outcome is
certain. Freedom and fear, justice and cruelty, have always been at
war, and we know that God is not neutral between them.
Fellow citizens, we’ll meet violence with patient justice —
assured of the rightness of our cause, and confident of the victories
to come. In all that lies before us, may God grant us wisdom, and
may He watch over the United States of America.


Good afternoon. On my orders, the United States military has
begun strikes against al Qaeda terrorist training camps and military
installations of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan. These carefully
targeted actions are designed to disrupt the use of Afghanistan as a
terrorist base of operations, and to attack the military capability of
the Taliban regime.
We are joined in this operation by our staunch friend, Great
Britain. Other close friends, including Canada, Australia, Germany
and France, have pledged forces as the operation unfolds. More
than 40 countries in the Middle East, Africa, Europe and across Asia
have granted air transit or landing rights. Many more have shared
intelligence. We are supported by the collective will of the world.
More than two weeks ago, I gave Taliban leaders a series of clear
and specific demands: Close terrorist training camps; hand over
leaders of the al Qaeda network; and return all foreign nationals,
including American citizens, unjustly detained in your country.
None of these demands were met. And now the Taliban will pay
a price. By destroying camps and disrupting communications,
we will make it more difficult for the terror network to train new
recruits and coordinate their evil plans.
Initially, the terrorists may burrow deeper into caves and other
entrenched hiding places. Our military action is also designed to
clear the way for sustained, comprehensive and relentless operations
to drive them out and bring them to justice.
At the same time, the oppressed people of Afghanistan will know
the generosity of America and our allies. As we strike military
targets, we’ll also drop food, medicine and supplies to the starving
and suffering men and women and children of Afghanistan.
The United States of America is a friend to the Afghan people,
————
75

and we are the friends of almost a billion worldwide who practice
the Islamic faith. The United States of America is an enemy of
those who aid terrorists and of the barbaric criminals who profane a
great religion by committing murder in its name.
This military action is a part of our campaign against terrorism,
another front in a war that has already been joined through
diplomacy, intelligence, the freezing of financial assets and the
arrests of known terrorists by law enforcement agents in 38
countries. Given the nature and reach of our enemies, we will win
this conflict by the patient accumulation of successes, by meeting a
series of challenges with determination and will and purpose.
Today we focus on Afghanistan, but the battle is broader. Every
nation has a choice to make. In this conflict, there is no neutral
ground. If any government sponsors the outlaws and killers of
innocents, they have become outlaws and murderers, themselves.
And they will take that lonely path at their own peril.
I’m speaking to you today from the Treaty Room of the White
House, a place where American Presidents have worked for peace.
We’re a peaceful nation. Yet, as we have learned, so suddenly and
so tragically, there can be no peace in a world of sudden terror. In
the face of today’s new threat, the only way to pursue peace is to
pursue those who threaten it.
We did not ask for this mission, but we will fulfill it. The name
of today’s military operation is Enduring Freedom. We defend
not only our precious freedoms, but also the freedom of people
everywhere to live and raise their children free from fear.
I know many Americans feel fear today. And our government
is taking strong precautions. All law enforcement and intelligence
agencies are working aggressively around America, around the
world and around the clock. At my request, many governors have
activated the National Guard to strengthen airport security. We
have called up Reserves to reinforce our military capability and
strengthen the protection of our homeland.
In the months ahead, our patience will be one of our strengths
patience with the long waits that will result from tighter security;
————
76

patience and understanding that it will take time to achieve our
goals; patience in all the sacrifices that may come.
Today, those sacrifices are being made by members of our Armed
Forces who now defend us so far from home, and by their proud and
worried families. A Commander-in-Chief sends America’s sons and
daughters into a battle in a foreign land only after the greatest care
and a lot of prayer. We ask a lot of those who wear our uniform.
We ask them to leave their loved ones, to travel great distances, to
risk injury, even to be prepared to make the ultimate sacrifice of
their lives. They are dedicated, they are honorable; they represent
the best of our country. And we are grateful.
To all the men and women in our military — every sailor, every
soldier, every airman, every coastguardsman, every Marine — I say
this: Your mission is defined; your objectives are clear; your goal is
just. You have my full confidence, and you will have every tool you
need to carry out your duty.
I recently received a touching letter that says a lot about the state
of America in these difficult times — a letter from a 4th-grade girl,
with a father in the military: “As much as I don’t want my Dad to
fight,” she wrote, “I’m willing to give him to you.”
This is a precious gift, the greatest she could give. This young
girl knows what America is all about. Since September 11, an entire
generation of young Americans has gained new understanding of
the value of freedom, and its cost in duty and in sacrifice.
The battle is now joined on many fronts. We will not waver;
we will not tire; we will not falter; and we will not fail. Peace and
freedom will prevail.
Thank you. May God continue to bless America.
Please be seated. President and Senator Clinton, thank you all
for being here. We have come here to pay our respects to 125 men
and women who died in the service of America. We also remember
64 passengers on a hijacked plane; those men and women, boys and
girls who fell into the hands of evildoers, and also died here exactly
one month ago.
On September 11th, great sorrow came to our country. And
from that sorrow has come great resolve. Today, we are a nation
awakened to the evil of terrorism, and determined to destroy it.
That work began the moment we were attacked; and it will continue
until justice is delivered.
Americans are returning, as we must, to the normal pursuits of
life. Americans are returning, as we must, to the normal pursuits
of life. But we know that if you lost a son or daughter here, or a
husband, or a wife, or a mom or dad, life will never again be as it
was. The loss was sudden, and hard, and permanent. So difficult to
explain. So difficult to accept.
Three schoolchildren traveling with their teacher. An Army
general. A budget analyst who reported to work here for 30 years. A
lieutenant commander in the Naval Reserve who left behind a wife,
a four-year-old son, and another child on the way.
One life touches so many others. One death can leave sorrow
that seems almost unbearable. But to all of you who lost someone
here, I want to say: You are not alone. The American people will
never forget the cruelty that was done here and in New York, and in
the sky over Pennsylvania.
We will never forget all the innocent people killed by the hatred
of a few. We know the loneliness you feel in your loss. The entire
————
79

nation, entire nation shares in your sadness. And we pray for you
and your loved ones. And we will always honor their memory.
The hijackers were instruments of evil who died in vain.
Behind them is a cult of evil which seeks to harm the innocent and
thrives on human suffering. Theirs is the worst kind of cruelty,
the cruelty that is fed, not weakened, by tears. Theirs is the worst
kind of violence, pure malice, while daring to claim the authority
of God. We cannot fully understand the designs and power of evil.
It is enough to know that evil, like goodness, exists. And in the
terrorists, evil has found a willing servant.
In New York, the terrorists chose as their target a symbol of
America’s freedom and confidence. Here, they struck a symbol
of our strength in the world. And the attack on the Pentagon, on
that day, was more symbolic than they knew. It was on another
September 11th — September 11th, 1941 — that construction
on this building first began. America was just then awakening to
another menace: The Nazi terror in Europe.
And on that very night, President Franklin Roosevelt spoke to
the nation. The danger, he warned, has long ceased to be a mere
possibility. The danger is here now. Not only from a military
enemy, but from an enemy of all law, all liberty, all morality, all
religion.
For us too, in the year 2001, an enemy has emerged that rejects
every limit of law, morality, and religion. The terrorists have no
true home in any country, or culture, or faith. They dwell in dark
corners of earth. And there, we will find them.
This week, I have called the Armed Forces into action. One
by one, we are eliminating power centers of a regime that harbors
al Qaeda terrorists. We gave that regime a choice: Turn over the
terrorists, or face your ruin. They chose unwisely.
The Taliban regime has brought nothing but fear and misery to
the people of Afghanistan. These rulers call themselves holy men,
even with their record of drawing money from heroin trafficking.
They consider themselves pious and devout, while subjecting
women to fierce brutality.
————
80

The Taliban has allied itself with murderers and gave them
shelter. But today, for al Qaeda and the Taliban, there is no shelter.
As Americans did 60 years ago, we have entered a struggle of
uncertain duration. But now, as then, we can be certain of the
outcome, because we have a number of decisive assets.
We have a unified country. We have the patience to fight and
win on many fronts: Blocking terrorist plans, seizing their funds,
arresting their networks, disrupting their communications, opposing
their sponsors. And we have one more great asset in this cause: The
brave men and women of the United States military.
From my first days in this office, I have felt and seen the strong
spirit of the Armed Forces. I saw it at Fort Stewart, Georgia, when
I first reviewed our troops as Commander-in-Chief, and looked into
the faces of proud and determined soldiers. I saw it in Annapolis on
a graduation day, at Camp Pendleton in California, Camp Bondsteel
in Kosovo. And I have seen this spirit at the Pentagon, before and
after the attack on this building.
You’ve responded to a great emergency with calm and courage.
And for that, your country honors you. A Commander-in-Chief
must know, must know that he can count on the skill and readiness
of servicemen and women at every point in the chain of command.
You have given me that confidence.
And I give you these commitments. The wound to this building
will not be forgotten, but it will be repaired. Brick by brick, we will
quickly rebuild the Pentagon. In the missions ahead for the military,
you will have everything you need, every resource, every weapon,
every means to assure full victory for the United States and the
cause of freedom.
And I pledge to you that America will never relent on this war
against terror. There will be times of swift, dramatic action. There
will be times of steady, quiet progress. Over time, with patience,
and precision, the terrorists will be pursued. They will be isolated,
surrounded, cornered, until there is no place to run, or hide, or rest.
As military and civilian personnel in the Pentagon, you are an
important part of the struggle we have entered. You know the risks
————
81

of your calling, and you have willingly accepted them. You believe
in our country, and our country believes in you.
Within sight of this building is Arlington Cemetery, the final
resting place of many thousands who died for our country over the
generations. Enemies of America have now added to these graves,
and they wish to add more. Unlike our enemies, we value every
life, and we mourn every loss.
Yet we’re not afraid. Our cause is just, and worthy of sacrifice.
Our nation is strong of heart, firm of purpose. Inspired by all the
courage that has come before, we will meet our moment and we will
prevail.
May God bless you all, and may God bless America.

Thank you. Mr. Secretary General, Mr. President, distinguished
delegates, and ladies and gentlemen. We meet in a hall devoted to
peace, in a city scarred by violence, in a nation awakened to danger,
in a world uniting for a long struggle. Every civilized nation here
today is resolved to keep the most basic commitment of civilization:
We will defend ourselves and our future against terror and lawless
violence.
The United Nations was founded in this cause. In a second
world war, we learned there is no isolation from evil. We affirmed
that some crimes are so terrible they offend humanity, itself. And
we resolved that the aggressions and ambitions of the wicked must
be opposed early, decisively, and collectively, before they threaten
us all. That evil has returned, and that cause is renewed.
A few miles from here, many thousands still lie in a tomb of
rubble. Tomorrow, the Secretary General, the President of the
General Assembly, and I will visit that site, where the names of
every nation and region that lost citizens will be read aloud. If we
were to read the names of every person who died, it would take
more than three hours.
Those names include a citizen of Gambia, whose wife spent their
fourth wedding anniversary, September the 12th, searching in vain
for her husband. Those names include a man who supported his
wife in Mexico, sending home money every week. Those names
include a young Pakistani who prayed toward Mecca five times a
day, and died that day trying to save others.
The suffering of September the 11th was inflicted on people
of many faiths and many nations. All of the victims, including
Muslims, were killed with equal indifference and equal satisfaction
by the terrorist leaders. The terrorists are violating the tenets of
————
83

every religion, including the one they invoke.
Last week, the Sheikh of Al-Azhar University, the world’s oldest
Islamic institution of higher learning, declared that terrorism is a
disease, and that Islam prohibits killing innocent civilians. The
terrorists call their cause holy, yet, they fund it with drug dealing;
they encourage murder and suicide in the name of a great faith that
forbids both. They dare to ask God’s blessing as they set out to
kill innocent men, women and children. But the God of Isaac and
Ishmael would never answer such a prayer. And a murderer is not a
martyr; he is just a murderer.
Time is passing. Yet, for the United States of America, there
will be no forgetting September the 11th. We will remember every
rescuer who died in honor. We will remember every family that
lives in grief. We will remember the fire and ash, the last phone
calls, the funerals of the children.
And the people of my country will remember those who have
plotted against us. We are learning their names. We are coming
to know their faces. There is no corner of the Earth distant or dark
enough to protect them. However long it takes, their hour of justice
will come.
Every nation has a stake in this cause. As we meet, the terrorists
are planning more murder — perhaps in my country, or perhaps
in yours. They kill because they aspire to dominate. They seek to
overthrow governments and destabilize entire regions.
Last week, anticipating this meeting of the General Assembly,
they denounced the United Nations. They called our Secretary
General a criminal and condemned all Arab nations here as traitors
to Islam.
Few countries meet their exacting standards of brutality and
oppression. Every other country is a potential target. And all
the world faces the most horrifying prospect of all: These same
terrorists are searching for weapons of mass destruction, the tools
to turn their hatred into holocaust. They can be expected to use
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons the moment they are
capable of doing so. No hint of conscience would prevent it.
————
84

This threat cannot be ignored. This threat cannot be appeased.
Civilization, itself, the civilization we share, is threatened. History
will record our response, and judge or justify every nation in this
hall.
The civilized world is now responding. We act to defend
ourselves and deliver our children from a future of fear. We choose
the dignity of life over a culture of death. We choose lawful change
and civil disagreement over coercion, subversion, and chaos. These
commitments — hope and order, law and life — unite people across
cultures and continents. Upon these commitments depend all peace
and progress. For these commitments, we are determined to fight.
The United Nations has risen to this responsibility. On the 12th
of September, these buildings opened for emergency meetings of
the General Assembly and the Security Council. Before the sun had
set, these attacks on the world stood condemned by the world. And
I want to thank you for this strong and principled stand.
I also thank the Arab Islamic countries that have condemned
terrorist murder. Many of you have seen the destruction of terror in
your own lands. The terrorists are increasingly isolated by their own
hatred and extremism. They cannot hide behind Islam. The authors
of mass murder and their allies have no place in any culture, and no
home in any faith.
The conspiracies of terror are being answered by an expanding
global coalition. Not every nation will be a part of every action
against the enemy. But every nation in our coalition has duties.
These duties can be demanding, as we in America are learning. We
have already made adjustments in our laws and in our daily lives.
We’re taking new measures to investigate terror and to protect
against threats.
The leaders of all nations must now carefully consider their
responsibilities and their future. Terrorist groups like al Qaeda
depend upon the aid or indifference of governments. They need the
support of a financial infrastructure, and safe havens to train and
plan and hide.
Some nations want to play their part in the fight against terror,
————
85

but tell us they lack the means to enforce their laws and control
their borders. We stand ready to help. Some governments still
turn a blind eye to the terrorists, hoping the threat will pass them
by. They are mistaken. And some governments, while pledging
to uphold the principles of the U.N., have cast their lot with the
terrorists. They support them and harbor them, and they will find
that their welcome guests are parasites that will weaken them, and
eventually consume them.
For every regime that sponsors terror, there is a price to be paid.
And it will be paid. The allies of terror are equally guilty of murder
and equally accountable to justice.
The Taliban are now learning this lesson — that regime and
the terrorists who support it are now virtually indistinguishable.
Together they promote terror abroad and impose a reign of terror on
the Afghan people. Women are executed in Kabal’s soccer stadium.
They can be beaten for wearing socks that are too thin. Men are
jailed for missing prayer meetings.
The United States, supported by many nations, is bringing
justice to the terrorists in Afghanistan. We’re making progress
against military targets, and that is our objective. Unlike the enemy,
we seek to minimize, not maximize, the loss of innocent life.
I’m proud of the honorable conduct of the American military. And
my country grieves for all the suffering the Taliban have brought
upon Afghanistan, including the terrible burden of war. The Afghan
people do not deserve their present rulers. Years of Taliban misrule
have brought nothing but misery and starvation. Even before this
current crisis, 4 million Afghans depended on food from the United
States and other nations, and millions of Afghans were refugees
from Taliban oppression.
I make this promise to all the victims of that regime:
The Taliban’s days of harboring terrorists and dealing in heroin and
brutalizing women are drawing to a close. And when that regime is
gone, the people of Afghanistan will say with the rest of the world:
good riddance.
I can promise, too, that America will join the world in helping
————
86

the people of Afghanistan rebuild their country. Many nations,
including mine, are sending food and medicine to help Afghans
through the winter. America has air-dropped over 1.3 million
packages of rations into Afghanistan. Just this week, we air-lifted
20,000 blankets and over 200 tons of provisions into the region. We
continue to provide humanitarian aid, even while the Taliban tried
to steal the food we send.
More help eventually will be needed. The United States will
work closely with the United Nations and development banks to
reconstruct Afghanistan after hostilities there have ceased and the
Taliban are no longer in control. And the United States will work
with the U.N. to support a post-Taliban government that represents
all of the Afghan people.
In this war on terror, each of us must answer for what we have
done or what we have left undone. After tragedy, there is a time for
sympathy and condolence. And my country has been very grateful
for both. The memorials and vigils around the world will not be
forgotten. But the time for sympathy has now passed; the time for
action has now arrived.
The most basic obligations in this new conflict have already
been defined by the United Nations. On September the 28th, the
Security Council adopted Resolution 1373. Its requirements are
clear: Every United Nations member has a responsibility to crack
down on terrorist financing. We must pass all necessary laws in our
own countries to allow the confiscation of terrorist assets. We must
apply those laws to every financial institution in every nation.
We have a responsibility to share intelligence and coordinate
the efforts of law enforcement. If you know something, tell us.
If we know something, we’ll tell you. And when we find the
terrorists, we must work together to bring them to justice. We
have a responsibility to deny any sanctuary, safe haven or transit
to terrorists. Every known terrorist camp must be shut down, its
operators apprehended, and evidence of their arrest presented to
the United Nations. We have a responsibility to deny weapons to
terrorists and to actively prevent private citizens from providing
————
87

them.
These obligations are urgent and they are binding on every
nation with a place in this chamber. Many governments are taking
these obligations seriously, and my country appreciates it. Yet, even
beyond Resolution 1373, more is required, and more is expected of
our coalition against terror.
We’re asking for a comprehensive commitment to this fight. We
must unite in opposing all terrorists, not just some of them. In this
world there are good causes and bad causes, and we may disagree
on where the line is drawn. Yet, there is no such thing as a good
terrorist. No national aspiration, no remembered wrong can ever
justify the deliberate murder of the innocent. Any government that
rejects this principle, trying to pick and choose its terrorist friends,
will know the consequences.
We must speak the truth about terror. Let us never tolerate
outrageous conspiracy theories concerning the attacks of September
the 11th; malicious lies that attempt to shift the blame away from
the terrorists, themselves, away from the guilty. To inflame ethnic
hatred is to advance the cause of terror.
The war against terror must not serve as an excuse to persecute
ethnic and religious minorities in any country. Innocent people
must be allowed to live their own lives, by their own customs, under
their own religion. And every nation must have avenues for the
peaceful expression of opinion and dissent. When these avenues are
closed, the temptation to speak through violence grows.
We must press on with our agenda for peace and prosperity in
every land. My country is pledged to encouraging development and
expanding trade. My country is pledged to investing in education
and combating AIDS and other infectious diseases around the
world. Following September 11th, these pledges are even more
important. In our struggle against hateful groups that exploit
poverty and despair, we must offer an alternative of opportunity and
hope.
The American government also stands by its commitment to a
just peace in the Middle East. We are working toward a day when
————
88

two states, Israel and Palestine, live peacefully together within
secure and recognize borders as called for by the Security Council
resolutions. We will do all in our power to bring both parties back
into negotiations. But peace will only come when all have sworn
off, forever, incitement, violence and terror.
And, finally, this struggle is a defining moment for the United
Nations, itself. And the world needs its principled leadership. It
undermines the credibility of this great institution, for example,
when the Commission on Human Rights offers seats to the world’s
most persistent violators of human rights. The United Nations
depends, above all, on its moral authority — and that authority must
be preserved.
The steps I described will not be easy. For all nations, they will
require effort. For some nations, they will require great courage.
Yet, the cost of inaction is far greater. The only alternative to
victory is a nightmare world where every city is a potential killing
field.
As I’ve told the American people, freedom and fear are at war.
We face enemies that hate not our policies, but our existence; the
tolerance of openness and creative culture that defines us. But the
outcome of this conflict is certain: There is a current in history and
it runs toward freedom. Our enemies resent it and dismiss it, but
the dreams of mankind are defined by liberty — the natural right
to create and build and worship and live in dignity. When men
and women are released from oppression and isolation, they find
fulfillment and hope, and they leave poverty by the millions.
These aspirations are lifting up the peoples of Europe, Asia,
Africa and the Americas, and they can lift up all of the Islamic
world.
We stand for the permanent hopes of humanity, and those hopes
will not be denied. We’re confident, too, that history has an author
who fills time and eternity with his purpose. We know that evil is
real, but good will prevail against it. This is the teaching of many
faiths, and in that assurance we gain strength for a long journey.
It is our task — the task of this generation — to provide the
————
89

response to aggression and terror. We have no other choice,
because there is no other peace.
We did not ask for this mission, yet there is honor in history’s
call. We have a chance to write the story of our times, a story of
courage defeating cruelty and light overcoming darkness. This
calling is worthy of any life, and worthy of every nation. So let us
go forward, confident, determined, and unafraid.
Thank you very much.

Thank you all very much. Please be seated. Thank you for that
warm welcome. I’m glad to be back here at The Citadel.
I have come to talk about the future security of our country, in a
place where I took up this subject two years ago when I was
candidate for President. In September 1999, I said here at the
Citadel that America was entering a period of consequences
that would be defined by the threat of terror, and that we faced a
challenge of military transformation. That threat has now revealed
itself, and that challenge is now the military and moral necessity of
our time.
So, today, I will set forth the commitments essential to victory in
our war against terror.
I want to thank Major General John Grinalds for his hospitality.
I want to thank the Citadel Board of Visitors, the staff, and the
faculty. I understand the Governor is here. And I know my friends,
the Lt. Governor, the Speaker and the Attorney General are here,
and it was great to have seen them at the airport. I thank my friend,
Adjutant General Stan Spears for being here.
I’m grateful that Senator Hollings and members of the South
Carolina congressional delegation flew down on Air Force One. I
only wish that the senior Senator was on the airplane so I could
have wished him a happy 99th birthday.
But most of all, most of all, I want to say how much I appreciate
being in the presence of some of America’s finest, the South
Carolina Corp of Cadets of Citadel.
Four days ago, I joined the men and women of the USS
Enterprise to mark the 60th anniversary of Pearl Harbor. December
7th, 1941 was a decisive day that changed our nation forever. In a
single moment, America’s “splendid isolation” was ended. And the
————
91

four years that followed transformed the American way of war.
The age of battleships gave way to the offensive capability of
aircraft carriers. The tank, once used only to protect infantry, now
served to cut through enemy lines. At Guadalcanal, and Normandy,
and Iwo Jima, amphibious warfare proved its worth. And by war’s
end, no one would ever again doubt the value of strategic air power.
Even more importantly, an American President and his
successors shaped a world beyond a war. They rebuilt Europe with
the Marshall Plan, formed a great alliance for freedom in NATO,
and expressed the hope of collective security in the United Nations.
America took the lead, becoming freedom’s defender and assuming
responsibilities that only we could bear.
September 11th, 2001 — three months and a long time ago —
set another dividing line in our lives and in the life of our nation.
An illusion of immunity was shattered. A faraway evil became
a present danger. And a great cause became clear: We will fight
terror and those who sponsor it, to save our children from a future
of fear.
To win this war, we have to think differently. The enemy who
appeared on September 11th seeks to evade our strength and
constantly searches for our weaknesses. So America is required
once again to change the way our military thinks and fights. And
starting on October 7th, the enemy in Afghanistan got the first
glimpses of a new American military that cannot, and will not, be
evaded.
When I committed U.S. forces to this battle, I had every
confidence that they would be up to the task. And they have proven
me right. The Taliban and the terrorists set out to dominate a
country and intimidate the world. Today, from their caves, it’s all
looking a little different. And no cave is deep enough to escape the
patient justice of the United States of America.
We are also beginning to see the possibilities of a world beyond
the war on terror. We have a chance, if we take it, to write a hopeful
chapter in human history. All at once, a new threat to civilization is
erasing old lines of rivalry and resentment between nations. Russia
————
92

and America are building a new cooperative relationship. India
and the United States are increasingly aligned across a range of
issues, even as we work closely with Pakistan. Germany and Japan
are assuming new military roles, appropriate to their status as great
democracies.
The vast majority of countries are now on the same side of a
moral and ideological divide. We’re making common cause with
every nation that chooses lawful change over chaotic violence —
every nation that values peace and safety and innocent life.
Staring across this divide are bands of murderers, supported by
outlaw regimes. They are a movement defined by their hatreds.
They hate progress, and freedom, and choice, and culture, and
music, and laughter, and women, and Christians, and Jews, and
all Muslims who reject their distorted doctrines. They love only
one thing — they love power. And when they have it, they use it
without mercy.
The great threat to civilization is not that the terrorists will
inspire millions. Only the terrorists themselves would want to live
in their brutal and joyless world. The great threat to civilization is
that a few evil men will multiply their murders, and gain the means
to kill on a scale equal to their hatred. We know they have this mad
intent, and we’re determined to stop them.
Our lives, our way of life, and our every hope for the world
depend on a single commitment: The authors of mass murder must
be defeated, and never allowed to gain or use the weapons of mass
destruction.
America and our friends will meet this threat with every method
at our disposal. We will discover and destroy sleeper cells. We will
track terrorist movements, trace their communications, disrupt their
funding, and take their network apart, piece by piece.
Above all, we’re acting to end the state sponsorship of terror.
Rogue states are clearly the most likely sources of chemical and
biological and nuclear weapons for terrorists. Every nation now
knows that we cannot accept — and we will not accept — states
that harbor, finance, train, or equip the agents of terror. Those
————
93

nations that violate this principle will be regarded as hostile
regimes. They have been warned, they are being watched, and
they will be held to account.
Preventing mass terror will be the responsibilities of
Presidents far into the future. And this obligation sets three
urgent and enduring priorities for America. The first priority is to
speed the transformation of our military.
When the Cold War ended, some predicted that the era of
direct threats to our nation was over. Some thought our military
would be used overseas — not to win wars, but mainly to police
and pacify, to control crowds and contain ethnic conflict. They
were wrong.
While the threats to America have changed, the need for
victory has not. We are fighting shadowy, entrenched enemies —
enemies using the tools of terror and guerrilla war — yet we are
finding new tactics and new weapons to attack and defeat them.
This revolution in our military is only beginning, and it promises
to change the face of battle.
Afghanistan has been a proving ground for this new approach.
These past two months have shown that an innovative doctrine
and high-tech weaponry can shape and then dominate an
unconventional conflict. The brave men and women of our
military are rewriting the rules of war with new technologies
and old values like courage and honor. And they have made this
nation proud.
Our commanders are gaining a real-time picture of the entire
battlefield, and are able to get targeting information from sensor
to shooter almost instantly. Our intelligence professionals and
special forces have cooperated in battle-friendly — with battlefriendly Afghan forces — fighters who know the terrain, who
know the Taliban, and who understand the local culture. And
our special forces have the technology to call in precision air
strikes — along with the flexibility to direct those strikes from
horseback, in the first cavalry charge of the 21st century.
This combination — real-time intelligence, local allied forces,
————
94

special forces, and precision air power — has really never been
used before. The conflict in Afghanistan has taught us more about
the future of our military than a decade of blue ribbon panels and
think-tank symposiums.
The Predator is a good example. This unmanned aerial vehicle is
able to circle over enemy forces, gather intelligence, transmit
information instantly back to commanders, then fire on targets with
extreme accuracy.
Before the war, the Predator had skeptics, because it did not fit
the old ways. Now it is clear the military does not have enough
unmanned vehicles. We’re entering an era in which unmanned
vehicles of all kinds will take on greater importance — in space, on
land, in the air, and at sea.
Precision-guided munitions also offer great promise. In the Gulf
War, these weapons were the exception — while in Afghanistan,
they have been the majority of the munitions we have used. We’re
striking with greater effectiveness, at greater range, with fewer
civilian casualties. More and more, our weapons can hit moving
targets. When all of our military can continuously locate and track
moving targets — with surveillance from air and space — warfare
will be truly revolutionized.
The need for military transformation was clear before the
conflict in Afghanistan, and before September the 11th. Here at the
Citadel in 1999, I spoke of keeping the peace by redefining war on
our terms. The same recommendation was made in the strategic
review that Secretary Rumsfeld briefed me on last August — a
review that I fully endorse. What’s different today is our sense
of urgency — the need to build this future force while fighting a
present war. It’s like overhauling an engine while you’re going at
80 miles an hour. Yet we have no other choice.
Our military has a new and essential mission. For states that
support terror, it’s not enough that the consequences be costly —
they must be devastating. The more credible this reality, the more
likely that regimes will change their behavior — making it less
likely that America and our friends will need to use overwhelming
————
95

force against them.
To build our future force, the Armed Services must continue
to attract America’s best people, with good pay and good living
conditions. Our military culture must reward new thinking,
innovation, and experimentation. Congress must give defense
leaders the freedom to innovate, instead of micromanaging the
Defense Department. And every service and every constituency
of our military must be willing to sacrifice some of their own pet
projects. Our war on terror cannot be used to justify obsolete bases,
obsolete programs, or obsolete weapon systems. Every dollar of
defense spending must meet a single test: It must help us build the
decisive power we will need to win the wars of the future.
Our country is united in supporting a great cause — and in
supporting those who fight for it. We will give our men and women
in uniform every resource, every weapon, every tool they need to
win the long battle that lies ahead.
America’s next priority to prevent mass terror is to protect
against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the
means to deliver them. I wish I could report to the American people
that this threat does not exist — that our enemy is content with car
bombs and box cutters — but I cannot.
One former al Qaeda member has testified in court that he was
involved in an effort 10 years ago to obtain nuclear materials.
And the leader of al Qaeda calls that effort “a religious duty.”
Abandoned al Qaeda houses in Kabul contained diagrams for
crude weapons of mass destruction. And as we all know, terrorists
have put anthrax into the U.S. mail, and used sarin gas in a Tokyo
subway.
And almost every state that actively sponsors terror is known to
be seeking weapons of mass destruction and the missiles to deliver
them at longer and longer ranges. Their hope is to blackmail the
United States into abandoning our war on terror, and forsaking
our friends and allies and security commitments around the world.
Our enemies are bound for disappointment. America will never be
blackmailed, and we will never forsake our commitment to liberty.
————
96

To meet our new threats, I have directed my National Security
Advisor and my Homeland Security Director to develop a
comprehensive strategy on proliferation. Working with other
countries, we will strengthen nonproliferation treaties and
toughen export controls. Together, we must keep the world’s
most dangerous technologies out of the hands of the world’s most
dangerous people.
A crucial partner in this effort is Russia — a nation we are
helping to dismantle strategic weapons, reduce nuclear material, and
increase security at nuclear sites. Our two countries will expand
efforts to provide peaceful employment for scientists who formerly
worked in Soviet weapons facilities. The United States will also
work with Russia to build a facility to destroy tons of nerve agent.
I’ll request an over-all increase in funding to support this vital
mission.
Even as we fight to prevent proliferation, we must prepare for
every possibility. At home, we must be better prepared to detect,
protect against, and respond to the potential use of weapons of mass
destruction. Abroad, our military forces must have the ability to
fight and win against enemies who would use such weapons against
us.
Biodefense has become a major initiative of ours. This year
we’ve already requested nearly $3 billion additional dollars for
biodefense, more than doubling the level of funding prior to
September the 11th.
The attacks on our nation made it even more clear that we need
to build limited and effective defenses against a missile attack.
Our enemies seek every chance and every means to do harm to our
country, our forces, and our friends. And we will not permit it.
Suppose the Taliban and the terrorists had been able to strike
America or important allies with a ballistic missile. Our coalition
would have become fragile, the stakes in our war much, much
higher. We must protect Americans and our friends against all
forms of terror, including the terror that could arrive on a missile.
Last week we conducted another promising test of our missile
————
97

defense technology. For the good of peace, we’re moving forward
with an active program to determine what works and what does
not work. In order to do so, we must move beyond the 1972 AntiBallistic Missile Treaty, a treaty that was written in a different era,
for a different enemy.
America and our allies must not be bound to the past. We must
be able to build the defenses we need against the enemies of the
21st century.
Our third and final priority in the fight against mass terror is to
strengthen the advantage that good intelligence gives our country.
Every day I make decisions influenced by the intelligence briefing
of that morning. To reach decisions, a President needs more than
data and information. A President needs real and current knowledge
and analysis of the plans, intentions, and capabilities of our
enemies.
The last several months have shown that there is no substitute
for good intelligence officers, people on the ground. These are the
people who find the targets, follow our enemies, and help us disrupt
their evil plans.
The United States must rebuild our network of human
intelligence. And we will apply the best new technology to gather
intelligence on the new threats. Sophisticated systems like Global
Hawk, an unmanned surveillance plane, are transforming our
intelligence capabilities. Our technological strengths produce great
advantages, and we will build on them.
Our intelligence services and federal law enforcement agencies
must work more closely together, and share timely information
with our state and local authorities. The more we know, the more
terrorist plans we can prevent and disrupt, and the better we’ll be
able to protect the American people.
And in all they do, our intelligence agencies must attract the best
people — the best collectors, the best analysts, the best linguists.
We will give them the training they need and the compensation they
deserve.
There have been times here in America when our intelligence
————
98

services were held in suspicion, and even contempt. Now, when we
face this new war, we know how much we need them. And for their
dedication and for their service, America is grateful.
We’re also grateful to you, the students of the Citadel. Your
uniforms symbolize a tradition of honor and sacrifice, renewed
in your own lives. Many of you will enter our military — taking
your place in the war against terror. That struggle may continue for
many years, and it may bring great costs. But you will have chosen
a great calling at a crucial hour for our nation.
The course we follow is a matter of profound consequence to
many nations. If America wavers, the world will lose heart. If
America leads, the world will show its courage. America will never
waver. America will lead the world to peace.
Our cause is necessary. Our cause is just. And no matter how
long it takes, we will defeat the enemies of freedom.
In all that is to come, I know the graduates of the Citadel will
bring credit to America, to the military, and to this great institution.
In the words of your school song, you will go where you’ve always
gone — “in the paths our fathers showed us. Peace and Honor, God
and Country — we will fight for thee.”
God bless.
A great writer has said that the struggle of humanity against
tyranny is the struggle of memory against forgetting. When we fight
terror, we fight tyranny; and so we remember. We remember the
perfect blueness of the sky that Tuesday morning. We remember
the children traveling without their mothers when their planes were
hijacked.
We remember the cruelty of the murderers and the pain and
anguish of the murdered. Every one of the innocents who died
on September the 11th was the most important person on earth to
somebody. Every death extinguished a world.
We remember the courage of the rescue workers and the
outpouring of friendship and sympathy from nations around the
world. We remember how we felt that day: our sadness, the surge of
love for our country, our anger, and our determination to right this
huge wrong.
Today, the wrong is being righted and justice is being done. We
still have far to go. And many dangers lie ahead. Yet, there can be
no doubt how this conflict will end. Our enemies have made the
mistake that America’s enemies always make. They saw liberty and
thought they saw weakness. And now, they see defeat.
In time, this war will end. But our remembrance never will.
All around this beautiful city are statues of our heroes, memorials,
museums and archives that preserve our national experience, our
achievements and our failures, our defeats and our victories.
This republic is young, but its memory is long. Now, we have
inscribed a new memory alongside those others. It’s a memory of
tragedy and shock, of loss and mourning. But not only of loss and
mourning. It’s also a memory of bravery and self-sacrifice, and the
love that lays down its life for a friend — even a friend whose name
————
101

it never knew.
We are privileged to have with us the families of many of the
heroes on September the 11th, including the family of Jeremy
Glick of Flight 93. His courage and self-sacrifice may have saved
the White House. It is right and fitting that it is here we pay our
respects.
In time, perhaps, we will mark the memory of September the
11th in stone and metal — something we can show children as yet
unborn to help them understand what happened on this minute and
on this day.
But for those of us who lived through these events, the only
marker we’ll ever need is the tick of a clock at the 46th minute of
the eighth hour of the 11th day. We will remember where we were
and how we felt. We will remember the dead and what we owe
them. We will remember what we lost and what we found.
And in our time, we will honor the memory of the 11th day by
doing our duty as citizens of this great country, freedom’s home and
freedoms defender. God bless.


Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney,
members of Congress, distinguished guests, fellow citizens: As we
gather tonight, our nation is at war, our economy is in recession, and
the civilized world faces unprecedented dangers. Yet the state of
our Union has never been stronger.
We last met in an hour of shock and suffering. In four short
months, our nation has comforted the victims, begun to rebuild New
York and the Pentagon, rallied a great coalition, captured, arrested,
and rid the world of thousands of terrorists, destroyed Afghanistan’s
terrorist training camps, saved a people from starvation, and freed a
country from brutal oppression.
The American flag flies again over our embassy in Kabul.
Terrorists who once occupied Afghanistan now occupy cells at
Guantanamo Bay. And terrorist leaders who urged followers to
sacrifice their lives are running for their own.
America and Afghanistan are now allies against terror. We’ll be
partners in rebuilding that country. And this evening we welcome
the distinguished interim leader of a liberated Afghanistan:
Chairman Hamid Karzai.
The last time we met in this chamber, the mothers and daughters
of Afghanistan were captives in their own homes, forbidden from
working or going to school. Today women are free, and are part of
Afghanistan’s new government. And we welcome the new Minister
of Women’s Affairs, Doctor Sima Samar.
Our progress is a tribute to the spirit of the Afghan people, to the
resolve of our coalition, and to the might of the United States
military. When I called our troops into action, I did so with
complete confidence in their courage and skill. And tonight, thanks
to them, we are winning the war on terror. The man and women
————
103

of our Armed Forces have delivered a message now clear to every
enemy of the United States: Even 7,000 miles away, across oceans
and continents, on mountaintops and in caves — you will not
escape the justice of this nation.
For many Americans, these four months have brought sorrow,
and pain that will never completely go away. Every day a retired
firefighter returns to Ground Zero, to feel closer to his two sons who
died there. At a memorial in New York, a little boy left his football
with a note for his lost father: Dear Daddy, please take this to
heaven. I don’t want to play football until I can play with you again
some day.
Last month, at the grave of her husband, Michael, a CIA officer
and Marine who died in Mazur-e-Sharif, Shannon Spann said these
words of farewell: “Semper Fi, my love.” Shannon is with us
tonight.
Shannon, I assure you and all who have lost a loved one that
our cause is just, and our country will never forget the debt we
owe Michael and all who gave their lives for freedom. Our cause
is just, and it continues. Our discoveries in Afghanistan confirmed
our worst fears, and showed us the true scope of the task ahead.
We have seen the depth of our enemies’ hatred in videos, where
they laugh about the loss of innocent life. And the depth of their
hatred is equaled by the madness of the destruction they design. We
have found diagrams of American nuclear power plants and public
water facilities, detailed instructions for making chemical weapons,
surveillance maps of American cities, and thorough descriptions of
landmarks in America and throughout the world.
What we have found in Afghanistan confirms that, far from
ending there, our war against terror is only beginning. Most of the
19 men who hijacked planes on September the 11th were trained
in Afghanistan’s camps, and so were tens of thousands of others.
Thousands of dangerous killers, schooled in the methods of murder,
often supported by outlaw regimes, are now spread throughout the
world like ticking time bombs, set to go off without warning.
Thanks to the work of our law enforcement officials and
————
104

coalition partners, hundreds of terrorists have been arrested. Yet,
tens of thousands of trained terrorists are still at large. These
enemies view the entire world as a battlefield, and we must pursue
them wherever they are. So long as training camps operate, so long
as nations harbor terrorists, freedom is at risk. And America and
our allies must not, and will not, allow it.
Our nation will continue to be steadfast and patient and
persistent in the pursuit of two great objectives. First, we will shut
down terrorist camps, disrupt terrorist plans, and bring terrorists to
justice. And, second, we must prevent the terrorists and regimes
who seek chemical, biological or nuclear weapons from threatening
the United States and the world.
Our military has put the terror training camps of Afghanistan
out of business, yet camps still exist in at least a dozen countries. A
terrorist underworld — including groups like Hamas, Hezbollah,
Islamic Jihad, Jaish-i-Mohammed — operates in remote jungles and
deserts, and hides in the centers of large cities.
While the most visible military action is in Afghanistan, America
is acting elsewhere. We now have troops in the Philippines, helping
to train that country’s armed forces to go after terrorist cells that
have executed an American, and still hold hostages. Our soldiers,
working with the Bosnian government, seized terrorists who were
plotting to bomb our embassy. Our Navy is patrolling the coast of
Africa to block the shipment of weapons and the establishment of
terrorist camps in Somalia.
My hope is that all nations will heed our call, and eliminate the
terrorist parasites who threaten their countries and our own. Many
nations are acting forcefully. Pakistan is now cracking down on
terror, and I admire the strong leadership of President Musharraf.
But some governments will be timid in the face of terror. And
make no mistake about it: If they do not act, America will.
Our second goal is to prevent regimes that sponsor terror from
threatening America or our friends and allies with weapons of mass
destruction. Some of these regimes have been pretty quiet since
September the 11th. But we know their true nature. North Korea
————
105

is a regime arming with missiles and weapons of mass destruction,
while starving its citizens.
Iran aggressively pursues these weapons and exports terror,
while an unelected few repress the Iranian people’s hope for
freedom.
Iraq continues to flaunt its hostility toward America and to
support terror. The Iraqi regime has plotted to develop anthrax, and
nerve gas, and nuclear weapons for over a decade. This is a regime
that has already used poison gas to murder thousands of its own
citizens — leaving the bodies of mothers huddled over their dead
children. This is a regime that agreed to international inspections —
then kicked out the inspectors. This is a regime that has something
to hide from the civilized world. States like these, and their terrorist
allies, constitute an axis of evil, arming to threaten the peace of the
world. By seeking weapons of mass destruction, these regimes
pose a grave and growing danger. They could provide these arms to
terrorists, giving them the means to match their hatred. They could
attack our allies or attempt to blackmail the United States. In any of
these cases, the price of indifference would be catastrophic.
We will work closely with our coalition to deny terrorists and
their state sponsors the materials, technology, and expertise to make
and deliver weapons of mass destruction. We will develop and
deploy effective missile defenses to protect America and our allies
from sudden attack. And all nations should know: America will do
what is necessary to ensure our nation’s security.
We’ll be deliberate, yet time is not on our side. I will not wait
on events, while dangers gather. I will not stand by, as peril draws
closer and closer. The United States of America will not permit
the world’s most dangerous regimes to threaten us with the world’s
most destructive weapons.
Our war on terror is well begun, but it is only begun. This
campaign may not be finished on our watch — yet it must be and it
will be waged on our watch.
We can’t stop short. If we stop now — leaving terror camps
intact and terror states unchecked — our sense of security would
————
106

be false and temporary. History has called America and our allies
to action, and it is both our responsibility and our privilege to fight
freedom’s fight.
Our first priority must always be the security of our nation, and
that will be reflected in the budget I send to Congress. My budget
supports three great goals for America: We will win this war; we’ll
protect our homeland; and we will revive our economy.
September the 11th brought out the best in America, and the best
in this Congress. And I join the American people in applauding your
unity and resolve. Now Americans deserve to have this same spirit
directed toward addressing problems here at home. I’m a proud
member of my party — yet as we act to win the war, protect our
people, and create jobs in America, we must act, first and foremost,
not as Republicans, not as Democrats, but as Americans.
It costs a lot to fight this war. We have spent more than a billion
dollars a month — over $30 million a day — and we must be
prepared for future operations. Afghanistan proved that expensive
precision weapons defeat the enemy and spare innocent lives, and
we need more of them. We need to replace aging aircraft and make
our military more agile, to put our troops anywhere in the world
quickly and safely. Our men and women in uniform deserve the
best weapons, the best equipment, the best training — and they also
deserve another pay raise.
My budget includes the largest increase in defense spending in
two decades — because while the price of freedom and security is
high, it is never too high. Whatever it costs to defend our country,
we will pay.
The next priority of my budget is to do everything possible to
protect our citizens and strengthen our nation against the ongoing
threat of another attack. Time and distance from the events of
September the 11th will not make us safer unless we act on its
lessons. America is no longer protected by vast oceans. We are
protected from attack only by vigorous action abroad, and increased
vigilance at home.
My budget nearly doubles funding for a sustained strategy
————
107

of homeland security, focused on four key areas: bioterrorism,
emergency response, airport and border security, and improved
intelligence. We will develop vaccines to fight anthrax and
other deadly diseases. We’ll increase funding to help states and
communities train and equip our heroic police and firefighters. We
will improve intelligence collection and sharing, expand patrols at
our borders, strengthen the security of air travel, and use technology
to track the arrivals and departures of visitors to the United States.
Homeland security will make America not only stronger, but, in
many ways, better. Knowledge gained from bioterrorism research
will improve public health. Stronger police and fire departments
will mean safer neighborhoods. Stricter border enforcement will
help combat illegal drugs. And as government works to better
secure our homeland, America will continue to depend on the eyes
and ears of alert citizens.
A few days before Christmas, an airline flight attendant spotted
a passenger lighting a match. The crew and passengers quickly
subdued the man, who had been trained by al Qaeda and was armed
with explosives. The people on that plane were alert and, as a
result, likely saved nearly 200 lives. And tonight we welcome and
thank flight attendants Hermis Moutardier and Christina Jones.
Once we have funded our national security and our homeland
security, the final great priority of my budget is economic security
for the American people. To achieve these great national objectives
— to win the war, protect the homeland, and revitalize our economy
— our budget will run a deficit that will be small and short-term,
so long as Congress restrains spending and acts in a fiscally
responsible manner. We have clear priorities and we must act at
home with the same purpose and resolve we have shown overseas:
We’ll prevail in the war, and we will defeat this recession.
Americans who have lost their jobs need our help and I support
extending unemployment benefits and direct assistance for
health care coverage. Yet, American workers want more than
unemployment checks — they want a steady paycheck. When
America works, America prospers, so my economic security plan
————
108

can be summed up in one word: jobs.
Good jobs begin with good schools, and here we’ve made a
fine start. Republicans and Democrats worked together to achieve
historic education reform so that no child is left behind. I was
proud to work with members of both parties: Chairman John
Boehner and Congressman George Miller. Senator Judd Gregg.
And I was so proud of our work, I even had nice things to say about
my friend, Ted Kennedy. I know the folks at the Crawford coffee
shop couldn’t believe I’d say such a thing, but our work on this
bill shows what is possible if we set aside posturing and focus on
results.
There is more to do. We need to prepare our children to read and
succeed in school with improved Head Start and early childhood
development programs. We must upgrade our teacher colleges and
teacher training and launch a major recruiting drive with a great
goal for America: a quality teacher in every classroom.
Good jobs also depend on reliable and affordable energy.
This Congress must act to encourage conservation, promote
technology, build infrastructure, and it must act to increase energy
production at home so America is less dependent on foreign oil.
Good jobs depend on expanded trade. Selling into new markets
creates new jobs, so I ask Congress to finally approve trade
promotion authority. On these two key issues, trade and energy, the
House of Representatives has acted to create jobs, and I urge the
Senate to pass this legislation.
Good jobs depend on sound tax policy. Last year, some in this
hall thought my tax relief plan was too small; some thought it was
too big. But when the checks arrived in the mail, most Americans
thought tax relief was just about right. Congress listened to the
people and responded by reducing tax rates, doubling the child
credit, and ending the death tax. For the sake of long-term growth
and to help Americans plan for the future, let’s make these tax cuts
permanent.
The way out of this recession, the way to create jobs, is to grow
the economy by encouraging investment in factories and equipment,
————
109

and by speeding up tax relief so people have more money to spend.
For the sake of American workers, let’s pass a stimulus package.
Good jobs must be the aim of welfare reform. As we reauthorize
these important reforms, we must always remember the goal is to
reduce dependency on government and offer every American the
dignity of a job.
Americans know economic security can vanish in an instant
without health security. I ask Congress to join me this year to enact
a patients’ bill of rights to give uninsured workers credits to help
buy health coverage, to approve an historic increase in the spending
for veterans’ health, and to give seniors a sound and modern
Medicare system that includes coverage for prescription drugs.
A good job should lead to security in retirement. I ask Congress
to enact new safeguards for 401K and pension plans. Employees
who have worked hard and saved all their lives should not have
to risk losing everything if their company fails. Through stricter
accounting standards and tougher disclosure requirements,
corporate America must be made more accountable to employees
and shareholders and held to the highest standards of conduct.
Retirement security also depends upon keeping the commitments
of Social Security, and we will. We must make Social Security
financially stable and allow personal retirement accounts for
younger workers who choose them.
Members, you and I will work together in the months ahead
on other issues: productive farm policy, a cleaner environment,
broader home ownership, especially among minorities, and ways to
encourage the good work of charities and faith-based groups. I ask
you to join me on these important domestic issues in the same spirit
of cooperation we’ve applied to our war against terrorism.
During these last few months, I’ve been humbled and privileged
to see the true character of this country in a time of testing. Our
enemies believed America was weak and materialistic, that we
would splinter in fear and selfishness. They were as wrong as they
are evil.
The American people have responded magnificently, with
————
110

courage and compassion, strength and resolve. As I have met
the heroes, hugged the families, and looked into the tired faces of
rescuers, I have stood in awe of the American people.
And I hope you will join me — I hope you will join me in
expressing thanks to one American for the strength and calm and
comfort she brings to our nation in crisis, our First Lady, Laura
Bush.
None of us would ever wish the evil that was done on September
the 11th. Yet after America was attacked, it was as if our entire
country looked into a mirror and saw our better selves. We were
reminded that we are citizens, with obligations to each other, to our
country, and to history. We began to think less of the goods we can
accumulate, and more about the good we can do.
For too long our culture has said, “If it feels good, do it.” Now
America is embracing a new ethic and a new creed: “Let’s roll.” In
the sacrifice of soldiers, the fierce brotherhood of firefighters, and
the bravery and generosity of ordinary citizens, we have glimpsed
what a new culture of responsibility could look like. We want to
be a nation that serves goals larger than self. We’ve been offered a
unique opportunity, and we must not let this moment pass.
My call tonight is for every American to commit at least two
years — 4,000 hours over the rest of your lifetime — to the service
of your neighbors and your nation. Many are already serving, and I
thank you. If you aren’t sure how to help, I’ve got a good place to
start. To sustain and extend the best that has emerged in America,
I invite you to join the new USA Freedom Corps. The Freedom
Corps will focus on three areas of need: responding in case of crisis
at home; rebuilding our communities; and extending American
compassion throughout the world.
One purpose of the USA Freedom Corps will be homeland
security. America needs retired doctors and nurses who can be
mobilized in major emergencies; volunteers to help police and
fire departments; transportation and utility workers well-trained in
spotting danger.

————
111

Our country also needs citizens working to rebuild our
communities. We need mentors to love children, especially children
whose parents are in prison. And we need more talented teachers in
troubled schools. USA Freedom Corps will expand and improve the
good efforts of AmeriCorps and Senior Corps to recruit more than
200,000 new volunteers.
And America needs citizens to extend the compassion of our
country to every part of the world. So we will renew the promise of
the Peace Corps, double its volunteers over the next five years, and
ask it to join a new effort to encourage development and education
and opportunity in the Islamic world.
This time of adversity offers a unique moment of opportunity
— a moment we must seize to change our culture. Through the
gathering momentum of millions of acts of service and decency and
kindness, I know we can overcome evil with greater good. And we
have a great opportunity during this time of war to lead the world
toward the values that will bring lasting peace.
All fathers and mothers, in all societies, want their children to be
educated, and live free from poverty and violence. No people on
Earth yearn to be oppressed, or aspire to servitude, or eagerly await
the midnight knock of the secret police.
If anyone doubts this, let them look to Afghanistan, where
the Islamic “street” greeted the fall of tyranny with song and
celebration. Let the skeptics look to Islam’s own rich history, with
its centuries of learning, and tolerance and progress. America will
lead by defending liberty and justice because they are right and true
and unchanging for all people everywhere.
No nation owns these aspirations, and no nation is exempt from
them. We have no intention of imposing our culture. But America
will always stand firm for the non-negotiable demands of human
dignity: the rule of law; limits on the power of the state; respect for
women; private property; free speech; equal justice; and religious
tolerance.
America will take the side of brave men and women who
advocate these values around the world, including the Islamic
————
112

world, because we have a greater objective than eliminating threats
and containing resentment. We seek a just and peaceful world
beyond the war on terror.
In this moment of opportunity, a common danger is erasing old
rivalries. America is working with Russia and China and India,
in ways we have never before, to achieve peace and prosperity.
In every region, free markets and free trade and free societies
are proving their power to lift lives. Together with friends and
allies from Europe to Asia, and Africa to Latin America, we will
demonstrate that the forces of terror cannot stop the momentum of
freedom.
The last time I spoke here, I expressed the hope that life would
return to normal. In some ways, it has. In others, it never will.
Those of us who have lived through these challenging times have
been changed by them. We’ve come to know truths that we will
never question: evil is real, and it must be opposed. Beyond all
differences of race or creed, we are one country, mourning together
and facing danger together. Deep in the American character, there is
honor, and it is stronger than cynicism. And many have discovered
again that even in tragedy — especially in tragedy — God is near.
In a single instant, we realized that this will be a decisive decade
in the history of liberty, that we’ve been called to a unique role in
human events. Rarely has the world faced a choice more clear or
consequential.
Our enemies send other people’s children on missions of suicide
and murder. They embrace tyranny and death as a cause and a
creed. We stand for a different choice, made long ago, on the day of
our founding. We affirm it again today. We choose freedom and the
dignity of every life.
Steadfast in our purpose, we now press on. We have known
freedom’s price. We have shown freedom’s power. And in this
great conflict, my fellow Americans, we will see freedom’s victory.
Thank you all. May God bless.


Well, thank you very much for that warm welcome. I am so
grateful for the Commonwealth Club and the Churchill Club for
inviting me here. I appreciate you all coming, and I appreciate your
hospitality.
I want to thank Dr. Gloria Duffy for her generous introduction
and for her invitation. I want to thank Silvia Fernandez, who’s the
President of the Churchill Club, for joining the Commonwealth
Club to host this event. I want to thank all the elected officials who
are here. I want to thank my fellow citizens for coming.
Whenever I visit California, I’m impressed by the beauty of this
state and by the spirit of the people. Because of its size, the health of
the California economy influences every American. And California
has got a culture of optimism and energy that touches all of us, as
well. This is a vital and a vibrant place. And I’m glad to be back.
The last time I visited San Jose, Silicon Valley was still in an
economic boom, and America was at peace. For many in this
valley, and across our country, those times are a world away. After a
recession made worse by a national emergency, we have seen some
good news. Our economy is beginning to grow. Just last week, we
had the good news about strong growth in the first quarter. Yet this
vital region reminds us that a lot of work remains to be done.
Business investment and job creation are not what they should
be. We cannot be content with one quarter’s news. We cannot be
complacent. My attitude is that we’ll let the statisticians talk about
the numbers. But so long as somebody who wants to work can’t find
work, that’s a problem for America.
We have a great task ahead of us. We must turn our short-term
recovery into long-lasting expansion that reaches every part of our
country. Our economy grows when trade barriers fall. I ask the
————
115

Senate to join the United States House of Representatives in giving
me what’s called trade promotion authority.
It’s important to be a confident country. And I’m confident in the
ability of American entrepreneurs and producers to compete in the
world. I’m confident that our farmers and ranchers can compete in
the world. And I know American technology companies are the best
in the world. And we must open new markets so they can sell to the
world.
Our economy grows when the tax burden goes down, and stays
down. Much of the growth we have seen this quarter is the result
of consumer spending, fueled by well-timed tax deductions. To
encourage growth in job creation, we must protect the lower tax
rates we’ve enacted, and we must make them permanent. And
to make sure there is economic vitality around our country, our
government must control its appetite for excessive spending.
Our economy grows entrepreneurs are rewarded for their
success, not hounded by regulations and needless litigation. We
must enact reforms that free entrepreneurs from pointless regulation
and endless litigation, and to restore trust in our economy. Corporate
leaders must be held to the highest ethical standards. And, as your
state knows, our economy grows when we have steady, stable and
affordable sources of energy.
In Washington, we must adopt — finally adopt — a
comprehensive strategy to conserve more, to produce more, and to
deliver the energy that keeps our economy running. Both Houses
have passed energy legislation. I expect them to get a bill to my
desk soon for the good of American economy and American jobs.
By acting in the above way, we confirm that the role of government
is not to create wealth; the role of government is to create the
conditions for economic growth.
Since I was last here, America has also accepted a great
challenge in the world: to wage a relentless and systematic
campaign against global terror. The security of the American
people is the central commitment of the American government. We
are in for a long and difficult war. It will be conducted on many
————
116

fronts. But as long as it takes, we will prevail.
In the first phase of our military operation, American and
coalition forces have liberated — have liberated — the people of
Afghanistan from a barbaric regime. Our Armed Forces performed
with skill and success and honor. A regime has fallen. Terrorists in
that country are now scattered, and the children of Afghanistan have
returned to school, boys and girls. Our work in that country is not
over. We are helping the Afghan people to rebuild their nation. And
in every cave, in every dark corner of that country, we will hunt
down the killers and bring them to justice.
We have entered the next phase of the war, with a sustained
international effort, to rout out terrorists in other countries, and deny
al Qaeda the chance to regroup in other places. Across the world,
governments have heard this message: You’re either with us, or
you’re with the terrorists.
And for the long-term security of America and civilization
itself, we must confront the great threat of biological and chemical
and nuclear weapons in the hands of terrorists or hostile regimes.
We will not allow the world’s most dangerous regimes to threaten
America or our friends and allies with the world’s most destructive
weapons.
History has called us to these responsibilities, and we accept
them. America has always had a special mission to defend justice
and advance freedom around the world. Whatever the difficulties
ahead, we are confident about the outcome of this struggle. Tyranny
and terror and lawless violence will not decide the world’s future.
As Ronald Reagan said and as every generation of Americans has
believed, the future belongs to the free.
In a time of war, we reassert the essential values and beliefs of
our country. In the Civil War, Abraham Lincoln pointed toward a
new birth of freedom. Leading America into global war, Franklin
D. Roosevelt defined the four freedoms: freedom of speech and
religion, freedom from fear and want. Whenever America fights
for the security of our country, we also fight for the values of our
country. In our time, we will defend the land we love and we will
————
117

act on the ideals that gave it birth.
In America, we’ve not always lived up to our ideals, yet we
always reached for them. We believe that everyone deserves a
chance, that everyone has value, that no insignificant person was
ever born. We believe that all are diminished when any are hopeless.
We are one people, committed to building a single nation of justice
and opportunity.
America rejects bigotry. We reject every act of hatred against
people of Arab background or Muslim faith. We reject the ancient
evil of anti-Semitism, whether it is practiced by the killers of Daniel
Pearl, or by those who burn synagogues in France.
America values and welcomes peaceful people of all faiths —
Christian, Jewish, Muslim, Sikh, Hindu and many others. Every
faith is practiced and protected here, because we are one country.
Every immigrant can be fully and equally American because we’re
one country. Race and color should not divide us, because America
is one country.
These American ideals of opportunity and equality come to us
across the generations. And they have attracted millions from across
the world. Yet there are young Americans growing up here, under
this flag, who doubt the promise and justice of our country. They
live in neighborhoods occupied by gangs and ruled by fear. They
are entitled by law to an education, yet do not receive an education.
They hear talk of opportunity and see little evidence of opportunity
around them.
Every American must believe in the promise of America. And
to reach this noble, necessary goal, there is a role for government.
America doesn’t need more big government, and we’ve learned
that more money is not always the answer. If a program is failing to
serve people, it makes little difference if we spend twice as much or
half as much. The measure of true compassion is results.
Yet we cannot have an indifferent government either. We are a
generous and caring people. We don’t believe in a sink-or-swim
society. The policies of our government must heed the universal
call of all faiths to love a neighbor as we would want to be loved
————
118

ourselves. We need a different approach than either big government
or indifferent government. We need a government that is focused,
effective, and close to the people; a government that does a few
things, and does them well.
Government cannot solve every problem, but it can encourage
people and communities to help themselves and to help one another.
Often the truest kind of compassion is to help citizens build lives
of their own. I call my philosophy and approach “compassionate
conservatism.” It is compassionate to actively help our fellow
citizens in need. It is conservative to insist on responsibility and
on results. And with this hopeful approach, we can make a real
difference in people’s lives.
Compassionate conservatism places great hope and confidence in
public education. Our economy depends on higher and higher skills,
requiring every American to have the basic tools of learning. Every
public school should be the path of upward mobility.
Yet, sadly enough, many are the dead-end of dreams. Public
schools are some of the most important institutions of democracy.
They take children of every background, from every part of the
world, and prepare them for the obligations and opportunities of a
free society. Public schools are Americans great hope, and making
them work for every child is America’s great duty.
The new education reforms we have passed in Washington give
the federal government a new role in public education. Schools
must meet new and high standards of performance in reading and
math that will be proven on tests and posted on the Internet for
parents and everyone to see. And we’re giving local schools and
teachers unprecedented freedom and resources and training to meet
these goals.
It is conservative to let local communities chart their own path to
excellence. It is compassionate to insist that every child learns, so
that no child is left behind. By insisting on results, and challenging
failure where we find it, we’ll make an incredible difference in the
lives of every child in America.
Compassionate conservatism offers a new vision for fighting
————
119

poverty in America. For decades, our nation has devoted enormous
resources to helping the poor, with some great successes to show
for it: basic medical care for those in need, a better life for elderly
Americans. However, for millions of younger Americans, welfare
became a static and destructive way of life.
In 1996, we began transforming welfare with time limits and job
training and work requirements. And the nation’s welfare rolls have
been cut by more than half. But even more importantly, many lives
have been dramatically improved.
One former welfare recipient here in California, happened to
be a mother of a chronically-ill child and the victim of domestic
violence, describes her experience upon leaving welfare. She said,
“I feel like an adult again. I have my dignity back.”
We need to continue to fully transform welfare in America. As
Congress takes up welfare reform again in the coming weeks, we
must strengthen the work requirements that prevent dependency and
despair. Millions of Americans once on welfare are finding that a
job is more than a source of income. It is a source of dignity. And
by helping people find work, by helping them prepare for work, we
practice compassion.
Welfare reform must also, wherever possible, encourage the
commitments of family. Not every child has two devoted parents at
home — I understand that. And not every marriage can, or should
be saved. But the evidence shows that strong marriages are good for
children.
When a couple on welfare wants to break bad patterns and start
or strengthen a marriage, we should help local groups give them
counseling that teaches commitment and respect. By encouraging
family, we practice compassion.
In overcoming poverty and dependence, we must also promote
the work of charities and community groups and faith-based
institutions. These organizations, such as shelters for battered
women or mentoring programs for fatherless children or drug
treatment centers, inspire hope in a way that government never can.
Often, they inspire life-changing faith in a way that government
————
120

never should.
Our government should view the good Americans that work in
faith-based charities as partners, not rivals. We must provide new
incentives for charitable giving and, when it comes to providing
federal resources to effective programs, we should not discriminate
against private and religious groups.
I urge the Senate to pass the faith-based initiative for the good
of America. It is compassionate to aggressively fight poverty in
America. It is conservative to encourage work and community spirit
and responsibility and the values that often come from faith. And
with this approach, we can change lives one soul at a time, and
make a real difference in the lives of our citizens.
The same principles of compassion and responsibility apply
when America offers assistance to other nations. Nearly half of
the world’s people still live on less than $2 a day. When we help
them, we show our values, our belief in universal human dignity.
We serve our interests and gain economic partners. And by helping
the developing nations of the world, we offer an alternative to
resentment and conflict and terror.
Yet the old way of pouring vast amounts of money into
development aid without any concern for results has failed, often
leaving behind misery and poverty and corruption. America’s
offering a new compact for global development. Greater aid
contributions from America must be and will be linked to greater
responsibility from developing nations.
I have proposed a 50-percent increase in our core development
assistance over the next three budget years. Money that will be
placed in a new Millennium Challenge Account. At the end of this
three-year period, the level of our annual development assistance
will be $5 billion higher than current levels.
This is a record amount of spending. And in return for these
funds, we expect nations to rout out corruption, to open their
markets, to respect human rights, and to adhere to the rule of law.
And these are the keys to progress in any nation, and they will be
the conditions for any new American aid.
————
121

It is compassionate to increase our international aid. It is
conservative to require the hard reforms that lead to prosperity and
independence. And with this approach, we’ll make a real difference
in the lives of people around the world.
Compassionate conservatism guides my administration in
many other areas. Our health care policies must help low-income
Americans to buy health insurance they choose, they own and
they control. Our environmental policy set high standards for
stewardship, while allowing local cooperation and innovation
to meet those standards. Our housing programs moved beyond
rental assistance to the pride and stability of home ownership. Our
reforms in Social Security must allow and encourage and help
working Americans to build up their own asset base and achieve
independence for their retirement years.
All of these policies and all of these areas serve the same vision.
We are using an active government to promote self-government.
We’re encouraging individuals and communities and families
to take more and more responsibility for themselves, for their
neighbors, for our nation. The aim of these policies is not to spend
more money or spend less money; it is to spend on what works.
The measure of compassion is more than good intentions, it
is good results. Sympathy is not enough. We need solutions in
America, and we know where solutions are found. When schools
are teaching, when families are strong, when neighbors look after
their neighbors, when our people have the tools and the skills and
the resources they need to improve their lives, there is no problem
that cannot be solved in America.
By being involved and by taking responsibility upon ourselves,
we gain something else, as well: We contribute to the life of our
country. We become more than taxpayers and occasional voters, we
become citizens. Citizens, not spectators. Citizens who hear the call
of duty, who stand up for their beliefs, who care for their families,
who control their lives, and who treat their neighbors with respect
and compassion. We discover a satisfaction that is only found in
service, and we show our gratitude to America and to those who
————
122

came before us.
In the last seven months, we’ve been tested, and the struggle of
our time has revealed the spirit of our people. Since September the
11th, we have been the kind of nation our founders had in mind,
a nation of strong and confident and self-governing people. And
we’ve been the kind of nation our fathers and mothers defended
in World War II; a great and diverse country, united by common
dangers and by common resolve.
We in our time will defend our nation, and we will deliver our
nation’s promise to all who seek it. In our war on terror, we are
showing the world the strength of our country, and by our unity and
tolerance and compassion, we will show the world the soul of our
country. May God bless America.

Thank you very much, General Lennox. Mr. Secretary, Governor
Pataki, members of the United States Congress, Academy staff and
faculty, distinguished guests, proud family members, and graduates:
I want to thank you for your welcome. Laura and I are especially
honored to visit this great institution in your bicentennial year.
In every corner of America, the words “West Point” command
immediate respect. This place where the Hudson River bends is
more than a fine institution of learning. The United States Military
Academy is the guardian of values that have shaped the soldiers
who have shaped the history of the world.
A few of you have followed in the path of the perfect West Point
graduate, Robert E. Lee, who never received a single demerit in four
years. Some of you followed in the path of the imperfect graduate,
Ulysses S. Grant, who had his fair share of demerits, and said the
happiest day of his life was “the day I left West Point.” During my
college years I guess you could say I was — During my college
years I guess you could say I was a Grant man.
You walk in the tradition of Eisenhower and MacArthur, Patton
and Bradley - the commanders who saved a civilization. And you
walk in the tradition of second lieutenants who did the same, by
fighting and dying on distant battlefields.
Graduates of this academy have brought creativity and courage
to every field of endeavor. West Point produced the chief engineer
of the Panama Canal, the mind behind the Manhattan Project, the
first American to walk in space. This fine institution gave us the
man they say invented baseball, and other young men over the years
who perfected the game of football.
You know this, but many in America don’t — George C.
Marshall, a VMI graduate, is said to have given this order: “I want
————
125

an officer for a secret and dangerous mission. I want a West Point
football player.”
As you leave here today, I know there’s one thing you’ll never
miss about this place: Being a plebe. But even a plebe at West Point
is made to feel he or she has some standing in the world. I’m told
that plebes, when asked whom they outrank, are required to answer
this: “Sir, the Superintendent’s dog, the Commandant’s cat, and all
the admirals in the whole damn Navy.” I probably won’t be sharing
that with the Secretary of the Navy.
West Point is guided by tradition, and in honor of the “Golden
Children of the Corps,” I will observe one of the traditions you
cherish most. As the Commander-in-Chief, I hereby grant amnesty
to all cadets who are on restriction for minor conduct offenses.
Those of you in the end zone might have cheered a little early.
Because, you see, I’m going to let General Lennox define exactly
what “minor” means.
Every West Point class is commissioned to the Armed Forces.
Some West Point classes are also commissioned by history, to take
part in a great new calling for their country. Speaking here to the
class of 1942 — six months after Pearl Harbor — General Marshall
said, “We’re determined that before the sun sets on this terrible
struggle, our flag will be recognized throughout the world as a
symbol of freedom on the one hand, and of overwhelming power on
the other.”
Officers graduating that year helped fulfill that mission, defeating
Japan and Germany, and then reconstructing those nations as allies.
West Point graduates of the 1940s saw the rise of a deadly new
challenge — the challenge of imperial communism — and opposed
it from Korea to Berlin, to Vietnam, and in the Cold War, from
beginning to end. And as the sun set on their struggle, many of those
West Point officers lived to see a world transformed.
History has also issued its call to your generation. In your last
year, America was attacked by a ruthless and resourceful enemy.
You graduate from this Academy in a time of war, taking your place
in an American military that is powerful and is honorable. Our war
————
126

on terror is only begun, but in Afghanistan it was begun well.
I am proud of the men and women who have fought on my
orders. America is profoundly grateful for all who serve the cause of
freedom, and for all who have given their lives in its defense. This
nation respects and trusts our military, and we are confident in your
victories to come.
This war will take many turns we cannot predict. Yet I am certain
of this: Wherever we carry it, the American flag will stand not only
for our power, but for freedom. Our nation’s cause has always been
larger than our nation’s defense. We fight, as we always fight, for a
just peace — a peace that favors human liberty. We will defend the
peace against threats from terrorists and tyrants. We will preserve
the peace by building good relations among the great powers. And
we will extend the peace by encouraging free and open societies on
every continent.
Building this just peace is America’s opportunity, and America’s
duty. From this day forward, it is your challenge, as well, and we
will meet this challenge together. You will wear the uniform of a
great and unique country. America has no empire to extend or utopia
to establish. We wish for others only what we wish for ourselves
— safety from violence, the rewards of liberty, and the hope for a
better life.
In defending the peace, we face a threat with no precedent.
Enemies in the past needed great armies and great industrial
capabilities to endanger the American people and our nation. The
attacks of September the 11th required a few hundred thousand
dollars in the hands of a few dozen evil and deluded men. All of the
chaos and suffering they caused came at much less than the cost of a
single tank. The dangers have not passed. This government and the
American people are on watch, we are ready, because we know the
terrorists have more money and more men and more plans.
The gravest danger to freedom lies at the perilous crossroads
of radicalism and technology. When the spread of chemical and
biological and nuclear weapons, along with ballistic missile
technology — when that occurs, even weak states and small
————
127

groups could attain a catastrophic power to strike great nations.
Our enemies have declared this very intention, and have been
caught seeking these terrible weapons. They want the capability to
blackmail us, or to harm us, or to harm our friends — and we will
oppose them with all our power.
For much of the last century, America’s defense relied on
the Cold War doctrines of deterrence and containment. In some
cases, those strategies still apply. But new threats also require new
thinking. Deterrence — the promise of massive retaliation against
nations — means nothing against shadowy terrorist networks with
no nation or citizens to defend. Containment is not possible when
unbalanced dictators with weapons of mass destruction can deliver
those weapons on missiles or secretly provide them to terrorist
allies.
We cannot defend America and our friends by hoping for the
best. We cannot put our faith in the word of tyrants, who solemnly
sign non-proliferation treaties, and then systemically break them.
If we wait for threats to fully materialize, we will have waited too
long.
Homeland defense and missile defense are part of stronger
security, and they’re essential priorities for America. Yet the war on
terror will not be won on the defensive. We must take the battle to
the enemy, disrupt his plans, and confront the worst threats before
they emerge. In the world we have entered, the only path to safety
is the path of action. And this nation will act.
Our security will require the best intelligence, to reveal threats
hidden in caves and growing in laboratories. Our security will
require modernizing domestic agencies such as the FBI, so they’re
prepared to act, and act quickly, against danger. Our security will
require transforming the military you will lead — a military that
must be ready to strike at a moment’s notice in any dark corner
of the world. And our security will require all Americans to be
forward-looking and resolute, to be ready for preemptive action
when necessary to defend our liberty and to defend our lives.
The work ahead is difficult. The choices we will face are
————
128

complex. We must uncover terror cells in 60 or more countries,
using every tool of finance, intelligence and law enforcement.
Along with our friends and allies, we must oppose proliferation and
confront regimes that sponsor terror, as each case requires. Some
nations need military training to fight terror, and we’ll provide it.
Other nations oppose terror, but tolerate the hatred that leads to
terror — and that must change. We will send diplomats where
they are needed, and we will send you, our soldiers, where you’re
needed.
All nations that decide for aggression and terror will pay a price.
We will not leave the safety of America and the peace of the planet
at the mercy of a few mad terrorists and tyrants. We will lift this
dark threat from our country and from the world.
Because the war on terror will require resolve and patience, it
will also require firm moral purpose. In this way our struggle is
similar to the Cold War. Now, as then, our enemies are totalitarians,
holding a creed of power with no place for human dignity. Now, as
then, they seek to impose a joyless conformity, to control every life
and all of life.
America confronted imperial communism in many different
ways — diplomatic, economic, and military. Yet moral clarity was
essential to our victory in the Cold War. When leaders like John F.
Kennedy and Ronald Reagan refused to gloss over the brutality of
tyrants, they gave hope to prisoners and dissidents and exiles, and
rallied free nations to a great cause.
Some worry that it is somehow undiplomatic or impolite to
speak the language of right and wrong. I disagree. Different
circumstances require different methods, but not different
moralities. Moral truth is the same in every culture, in every time,
and in every place. Targeting innocent civilians for murder is always
and everywhere wrong. Brutality against women is always and
everywhere wrong. There can be no neutrality between justice and
cruelty, between the innocent and the guilty. We are in a conflict
between good and evil, and America will call evil by its name. By
confronting evil and lawless regimes, we do not create a problem,
————
129

we reveal a problem. And we will lead the world in opposing it.
As we defend the peace, we also have an historic opportunity to
preserve the peace. We have our best chance since the rise of the
nation state in the 17th century to build a world where the great
powers compete in peace instead of prepare for war. The history
of the last century, in particular, was dominated by a series of
destructive national rivalries that left battlefields and graveyards
across the Earth. Germany fought France, the Axis fought the
Allies, and then the East fought the West, in proxy wars and tense
standoffs, against a backdrop of nuclear Armageddon.
Competition between great nations is inevitable, but armed
conflict in our world is not. More and more, civilized nations
find ourselves on the same side — united by common dangers
of terrorist violence and chaos. America has, and intends to
keep, military strengths beyond challenge, thereby making the
destabilizing arms races of other eras pointless, and limiting
rivalries to trade and other pursuits of peace.
Today the great powers are also increasingly united by common
values, instead of divided by conflicting ideologies. The United
States, Japan and our Pacific friends, and now all of Europe,
share a deep commitment to human freedom, embodied in strong
alliances such as NATO. And the tide of liberty is rising in many
other nations.
Generations of West Point officers planned and practiced for
battles with Soviet Russia. I’ve just returned from a new Russia,
now a country reaching toward democracy, and our partner in the
war against terror. Even in China, leaders are discovering that
economic freedom is the only lasting source of national wealth. In
time, they will find that social and political freedom is the only true
source of national greatness.
When the great powers share common values, we are better
able to confront serious regional conflicts together, better able to
cooperate in preventing the spread of violence or economic chaos.
In the past, great power rivals took sides in difficult regional
problems, making divisions deeper and more complicated. Today,
————
130

from the Middle East to South Asia, we are gathering broad
international coalitions to increase the pressure for peace. We must
build strong and great power relations when times are good; to
help manage crisis when times are bad. America needs partners to
preserve the peace, and we will work with every nation that shares
this noble goal.
And finally, America stands for more than the absence of war.
We have a great opportunity to extend a just peace, by replacing
poverty, repression, and resentment around the world with hope
of a better day. Through most of history, poverty was persistent,
inescapable, and almost universal. In the last few decades, we’ve
seen nations from Chile to South Korea build modern economies
and freer societies, lifting millions of people out of despair and
want. And there’s no mystery to this achievement.
The 20th century ended with a single surviving model of human
progress, based on non-negotiable demands of human dignity, the
rule of law, limits on the power of the state, respect for women and
private property and free speech and equal justice and religious
tolerance. America cannot impose this vision — yet we can support
and reward governments that make the right choices for their own
people. In our development aid, in our diplomatic efforts, in our
international broadcasting, and in our educational assistance, the
United States will promote moderation and tolerance and human
rights. And we will defend the peace that makes all progress
possible.
When it comes to the common rights and needs of men and
women, there is no clash of civilizations. The requirements of
freedom apply fully to Africa and Latin America and the entire
Islamic world. The peoples of the Islamic nations want and deserve
the same freedoms and opportunities as people in every nation. And
their governments should listen to their hopes.
A truly strong nation will permit legal avenues of dissent
for all groups that pursue their aspirations without violence. An
advancing nation will pursue economic reform, to unleash the great
entrepreneurial energy of its people. A thriving nation will respect
————
131

the rights of women, because no society can prosper while denying
opportunity to half its citizens. Mothers and fathers and children
across the Islamic world, and all the world, share the same fears
and aspirations. In poverty, they struggle. In tyranny, they suffer.
And as we saw in Afghanistan, in liberation they celebrate.
America has a greater objective than controlling threats and
containing resentment. We will work for a just and peaceful world
beyond the war on terror.
The bicentennial class of West Point now enters this drama.
With all in the United States Army, you will stand between your
fellow citizens and grave danger. You will help establish a peace
that allows millions around the world to live in liberty and to grow
in prosperity. You will face times of calm, and times of crisis. And
every test will find you prepared — because you’re the men and
women of West Point. You leave here marked by the character of
this Academy, carrying with you the highest ideals of our nation.
Toward the end of his life, Dwight Eisenhower recalled the first
day he stood on the plain at West Point. “The feeling came over
me,” he said, “that the expression ‘the United States of America’
would now and henceforth mean something different than it had
ever before. From here on, it would be the nation I would be
serving, not myself.”
Today, your last day at West Point, you begin a life of service in
a career unlike any other. You’ve answered a calling to hardship
and purpose, to risk and honor. At the end of every day you will
know that you have faithfully done your duty. May you always
bring to that duty the high standards of this great American
institution. May you always be worthy of the long gray line that
stretches two centuries behind you.
On behalf of the nation, I congratulate each one of you for
the commission you’ve earned and for the credit you bring to the
United States of America. May God bless you all.
For too long, the citizens of the Middle East have lived in the
midst of death and fear. The hatred of a few holds the hopes of
many hostage. The forces of extremism and terror are attempting
to kill progress and peace by killing the innocent. And this casts a
dark shadow over an entire region. For the sake of all humanity,
things must change in the Middle East.
It is untenable for Israeli citizens to live in terror. It is untenable
for Palestinians to live in squalor and occupation. And the current
situation offers no prospect that life will improve. Israeli citizens
will continue to be victimized by terrorists, and so Israel will
continue to defend herself.
In the situation the Palestinian people will grow more and more
miserable. My vision is two states, living side by side in peace
and security. There is simply no way to achieve that peace until all
parties fight terror. Yet, at this critical moment, if all parties will
break with the past and set out on a new path, we can overcome the
darkness with the light of hope. Peace requires a new and different
Palestinian leadership, so that a Palestinian state can be born.
I call on the Palestinian people to elect new leaders, leaders
not compromised by terror. I call upon them to build a practicing
democracy, based on tolerance and liberty. If the Palestinian people
actively pursue these goals, America and the world will actively
support their efforts. If the Palestinian people meet these goals,
they will be able to reach agreement with Israel and Egypt and
Jordan on security and other arrangements for independence.
And when the Palestinian people have new leaders, new
institutions and new security arrangements with their neighbors, the
United States of America will support the creation of a Palestinian
state whose borders and certain aspects of its sovereignty will be
————
133

provisional until resolved as part of a final settlement in the Middle
East.
In the work ahead, we all have responsibilities. The Palestinian
people are gifted and capable, and I am confident they can achieve
a new birth for their nation. A Palestinian state will never be created
by terror — it will be built through reform. And reform must be
more than cosmetic change, or veiled attempt to preserve the status
quo. True reform will require entirely new political and economic
institutions, based on democracy, market economics and action
against terrorism.
Today, the elected Palestinian legislature has no authority, and
power is concentrated in the hands of an unaccountable few. A
Palestinian state can only serve its citizens with a new constitution
which separates the powers of government. The Palestinian
parliament should have the full authority of a legislative body. Local
officials and government ministers need authority of their own and
the independence to govern effectively.
The United States, along with the European Union and
Arab states, will work with Palestinian leaders to create a new
constitutional framework, and a working democracy for the
Palestinian people. And the United States, along with others in the
international community will help the Palestinians organize and
monitor fair, multi-party local elections by the end of the year, with
national elections to follow.
Today, the Palestinian people live in economic stagnation,
made worse by official corruption. A Palestinian state will require a
vibrant economy, where honest enterprise is encouraged by honest
government. The United States, the international donor community
and the World Bank stand ready to work with Palestinians on a
major project of economic reform and development. The United
States, the EU, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund
are willing to oversee reforms in Palestinian finances, encouraging
transparency and independent auditing.
And the United States, along with our partners in the developed
world, will increase our humanitarian assistance to relieve
————
134

Palestinian suffering. Today, the Palestinian people lack effective
courts of law and have no means to defend and vindicate their
rights. A Palestinian state will require a system of reliable justice
to punish those who prey on the innocent. The United States and
members of the international community stand ready to work with
Palestinian leaders to establish finance — establish finance and
monitor a truly independent judiciary.
Today, Palestinian authorities are encouraging, not opposing,
terrorism. This is unacceptable. And the United States will not
support the establishment of a Palestinian state until its leaders
engage in a sustained fight against the terrorists and dismantle their
infrastructure. This will require an externally supervised effort to
rebuild and reform the Palestinian security services. The security
system must have clear lines of authority and accountability and a
unified chain of command.
America is pursuing this reform along with key regional states.
The world is prepared to help, yet ultimately these steps toward
statehood depend on the Palestinian people and their leaders. If
they energetically take the path of reform, the rewards can come
quickly. If Palestinians embrace democracy, confront corruption
and firmly reject terror, they can count on American support for the
creation of a provisional state of Palestine.
With a dedicated effort, this state could rise rapidly, as it comes
to terms with Israel, Egypt and Jordan on practical issues, such
as security. The final borders, the capital and other aspects of this
state’s sovereignty will be negotiated between the parties, as part
of a final settlement. Arab states have offered their help in this
process, and their help is needed.
I’ve said in the past that nations are either with us or against us
in the war on terror. To be counted on the side of peace, nations
must act. Every leader actually committed to peace will end
incitement to violence in official media, and publicly denounce
homicide bombings. Every nation actually committed to peace
will stop the flow of money, equipment and recruits to terrorist
groups seeking the destruction of Israel — including Hamas,
————
135

Islamic Jihad, and Hezbollah. Every nation actually committed to
peace must block the shipment of Iranian supplies to these groups,
and oppose regimes that promote terror, like Iraq. And Syria must
choose the right side in the war on terror by closing terrorist camps
and expelling terrorist organizations.
Leaders who want to be included in the peace process must show
by their deeds an undivided support for peace. And as we move
toward a peaceful solution, Arab states will be expected to build
closer ties of diplomacy and commerce with Israel, leading to full
normalization of relations between Israel and the entire Arab world.
Israel also has a large stake in the success of a democratic
Palestine. Permanent occupation threatens Israel’s identity and
democracy. A stable, peaceful Palestinian state is necessary to
achieve the security that Israel longs for. So I challenge Israel to
take concrete steps to support the emergence of a viable, credible
Palestinian state.
As we make progress towards security, Israel forces need
to withdraw fully to positions they held prior to September 28,
2000. And consistent with the recommendations of the Mitchell
Committee, Israeli settlement activity in the occupied territories
must stop.
The Palestinian economy must be allowed to develop. As
violence subsides, freedom of movement should be restored,
permitting innocent Palestinians to resume work and normal life.
Palestinian legislators and officials, humanitarian and international
workers, must be allowed to go about the business of building a
better future. And Israel should release frozen Palestinian revenues
into honest, accountable hands.
I’ve asked Secretary Powell to work intensively with Middle
Eastern and international leaders to realize the vision of a
Palestinian state, focusing them on a comprehensive plan to support
Palestinian reform and institution-building.
Ultimately, Israelis and Palestinians must address the core issues
that divide them if there is to be a real peace, resolving all claims
and ending the conflict between them. This means that the Israeli
————
136

occupation that began in 1967 will be ended through a settlement
negotiated between the parties, based on U.N. Resolutions 242 and
338, with Israeli withdrawal to secure and recognize borders.
We must also resolve questions concerning Jerusalem, the
plight and future of Palestinian refugees, and a final peace between
Israel and Lebanon, and Israel and a Syria that supports peace and
fights terror.
All who are familiar with the history of the Middle East realize
that there may be setbacks in this process. Trained and determined
killers, as we have seen, want to stop it. Yet the Egyptian and
Jordanian peace treaties with Israel remind us that with determined
and responsible leadership progress can come quickly.
As new Palestinian institutions and new leaders emerge,
demonstrating real performance on security and reform, I expect
Israel to respond and work toward a final status agreement. With
intensive effort by all, this agreement could be reached within
three years from now. And I and my country will actively lead
toward that goal.
I can understand the deep anger and anguish of the Israeli
people. You’ve lived too long with fear and funerals, having to
avoid markets and public transportation, and forced to put armed
guards in kindergarten classrooms. The Palestinian Authority has
rejected your offer at hand, and trafficked with terrorists. You have
a right to a normal life; you have a right to security; and I deeply
believe that you need a reformed, responsible Palestinian partner
to achieve that security.
I can understand the deep anger and despair of the Palestinian
people. For decades you’ve been treated as pawns in the
Middle East conflict. Your interests have been held hostage to
a comprehensive peace agreement that never seems to come, as
your lives get worse year by year. You deserve democracy and the
rule of law. You deserve an open society and a thriving economy.
You deserve a life of hope for your children. An end to occupation
and a peaceful democratic Palestinian state may seem distant, but
America and our partners throughout the world stand ready to
————
137

help, help you make them possible as soon as possible.
If liberty can blossom in the rocky soil of the West Bank and
Gaza, it will inspire millions of men and women around the globe
who are equally weary of poverty and oppression, equally entitled
to the benefits of democratic government.
I have a hope for the people of Muslim countries. Your
commitments to morality, and learning, and tolerance led to great
historical achievements. And those values are alive in the Islamic
world today. You have a rich culture, and you share the aspirations
of men and women in every culture. Prosperity and freedom and
dignity are not just American hopes, or Western hopes. They are
universal, human hopes. And even in the violence and turmoil of
the Middle East, America believes those hopes have the power to
transform lives and nations.
This moment is both an opportunity and a test for all parties in
the Middle East: an opportunity to lay the foundations for future
peace; a test to show who is serious about peace and who is not. The
choice here is stark and simple. The Bible says, “I have set before
you life and death; therefore, choose life.” The time has arrived for
everyone in this conflict to choose peace, and hope, and life.
Thank you very much.


Mr. Secretary General, Mr. President, distinguished delegates,
and ladies and gentlemen: We meet one year and one day after
a terrorist attack brought grief to my country, and brought grief
to many citizens of our world. Yesterday, we remembered the
innocent lives taken that terrible morning. Today, we turn to the
urgent duty of protecting other lives, without illusion and without
fear.
We’ve accomplished much in the last year — in Afghanistan
and beyond. We have much yet to do — in Afghanistan and
beyond. Many nations represented here have joined in the fight
against global terror, and the people of the United States are
grateful.
The United Nations was born in the hope that survived a world
war — the hope of a world moving toward justice, escaping old
patterns of conflict and fear. The founding members resolved
that the peace of the world must never again be destroyed by the
will and wickedness of any man. We created the United Nations
Security Council, so that, unlike the League of Nations, our
deliberations would be more than talk, our resolutions would be
more than wishes. After generations of deceitful dictators and
broken treaties and squandered lives, we dedicated ourselves
to standards of human dignity shared by all, and to a system of
security defended by all.
Today, these standards, and this security, are challenged. Our
commitment to human dignity is challenged by persistent poverty
and raging disease. The suffering is great, and our responsibilities
are clear. The United States is joining with the world to supply
aid where it reaches people and lifts up lives, to extend trade
and the prosperity it brings, and to bring medical care where it is

desperately needed.
As a symbol of our commitment to human dignity, the United
States will return to UNESCO. This organization has been
reformed and America will participate fully in its mission to
advance human rights and tolerance and learning.
Our common security is challenged by regional conflicts —
ethnic and religious strife that is ancient, but not inevitable. In the
Middle East, there can be no peace for either side without freedom
for both sides. America stands committed to an independent and
democratic Palestine, living side by side with Israel in peace and
security. Like all other people, Palestinians deserve a government
that serves their interests and listens to their voices. My nation will
continue to encourage all parties to step up to their responsibilities
as we seek a just and comprehensive settlement to the conflict.
Above all, our principles and our security are challenged today
by outlaw groups and regimes that accept no law of morality and
have no limit to their violent ambitions. In the attacks on America
a year ago, we saw the destructive intentions of our enemies. This
threat hides within many nations, including my own. In cells and
camps, terrorists are plotting further destruction, and building new
bases for their war against civilization. And our greatest fear is that
terrorists will find a shortcut to their mad ambitions when an outlaw
regime supplies them with the technologies to kill on a massive
scale.
In one place — in one regime — we find all these dangers,
in their most lethal and aggressive forms, exactly the kind of
aggressive threat the United Nations was born to confront.
Twelve years ago, Iraq invaded Kuwait without provocation.
And the regime’s forces were poised to continue their march to
seize other countries and their resources. Had Saddam Hussein been
appeased instead of stopped, he would have endangered the peace
and stability of the world. Yet this aggression was stopped — by the
might of coalition forces and the will of the United Nations.
To suspend hostilities, to spare himself, Iraq’s dictator accepted
a series of commitments. The terms were clear, to him and to all.
————
140

And he agreed to prove he is complying with every one of those
obligations.
He has proven instead only his contempt for the United Nations,
and for all his pledges. By breaking every pledge — by his
deceptions, and by his cruelties — Saddam Hussein has made the
case against himself.
In 1991, Security Council Resolution 688 demanded that
the Iraqi regime cease at once the repression of its own people,
including the systematic repression of minorities — which the
Council said, threatened international peace and security in the
region. This demand goes ignored.
Last year, the U.N. Commission on Human Rights found that
Iraq continues to commit extremely grave violations of human
rights, and that the regime’s repression is all pervasive. Tens of
thousands of political opponents and ordinary citizens have been
subjected to arbitrary arrest and imprisonment, summary execution,
and torture by beating and burning, electric shock, starvation,
mutilation, and rape. Wives are tortured in front of their husbands,
children in the presence of their parents — and all of these horrors
concealed from the world by the apparatus of a totalitarian state.
In 1991, the U.N. Security Council, through Resolutions 686
and 687, demanded that Iraq return all prisoners from Kuwait and
other lands. Iraq’s regime agreed. It broke its promise. Last year the
Secretary General’s high-level coordinator for this issue reported
that Kuwait, Saudi, Indian, Syrian, Lebanese, Iranian, Egyptian,
Bahraini, and Omani nationals remain unaccounted for — more
than 600 people. One American pilot is among them.
In 1991, the U.N. Security Council, through Resolution 687,
demanded that Iraq renounce all involvement with terrorism, and
permit no terrorist organizations to operate in Iraq. Iraq’s regime
agreed. It broke this promise. In violation of Security Council
Resolution 1373, Iraq continues to shelter and support terrorist
organizations that direct violence against Iran, Israel, and Western
governments. Iraqi dissidents abroad are targeted for murder.
In 1993, Iraq attempted to assassinate the Emir of Kuwait and a
————
141

former American President. Iraq’s government openly praised the
attacks of September the 11th. And al Qaeda terrorists escaped from
Afghanistan and are known to be in Iraq.
In 1991, the Iraqi regime agreed to destroy and stop developing
all weapons of mass destruction and long-range missiles, and to
prove to the world it has done so by complying with rigorous
inspections. Iraq has broken every aspect of this fundamental
pledge.
From 1991 to 1995, the Iraqi regime said it had no biological
weapons. After a senior official in its weapons program defected
and exposed this lie, the regime admitted to producing tens of
thousands of liters of anthrax and other deadly biological agents
for use with Scud warheads, aerial bombs, and aircraft spray tanks.
U.N. inspectors believe Iraq has produced two to four times the
amount of biological agents it declared, and has failed to account
for more than three metric tons of material that could be used to
produce biological weapons. Right now, Iraq is expanding and
improving facilities that were used for the production of biological
weapons.
United Nations’ inspections also revealed that Iraq likely
maintains stockpiles of VX, mustard and other chemical agents,
and that the regime is rebuilding and expanding facilities capable of
producing chemical weapons.
And in 1995, after four years of deception, Iraq finally admitted
it had a crash nuclear weapons program prior to the Gulf War. We
know now, were it not for that war, the regime in Iraq would likely
have possessed a nuclear weapon no later than 1993.
Today, Iraq continues to withhold important information about
its nuclear program — weapons design, procurement logs,
experiment data, an accounting of nuclear materials and
documentation of foreign assistance. Iraq employs capable nuclear
scientists and technicians. It retains physical infrastructure needed
to build a nuclear weapon. Iraq has made several attempts to buy
high-strength aluminum tubes used to enrich uranium for a nuclear
weapon. Should Iraq acquire fissile material, it would be able to
————
142

build a nuclear weapon within a year. And Iraq’s state-controlled
media has reported numerous meetings between Saddam Hussein
and his nuclear scientists, leaving little doubt about his continued
appetite for these weapons.
Iraq also possesses a force of Scud-type missiles with ranges
beyond the 150 kilometers permitted by the U.N. Work at testing
and production facilities shows that Iraq is building more longrange missiles that it can inflict mass death throughout the region.
In 1990, after Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait, the world imposed
economic sanctions on Iraq. Those sanctions were maintained after
the war to compel the regime’s compliance with Security Council
resolutions. In time, Iraq was allowed to use oil revenues to buy
food. Saddam Hussein has subverted this program, working around
the sanctions to buy missile technology and military materials.
He blames the suffering of Iraq’s people on the United Nations,
even as he uses his oil wealth to build lavish palaces for himself,
and to buy arms for his country. By refusing to comply with his
own agreements, he bears full guilt for the hunger and misery of
innocent Iraqi citizens.
In 1991, Iraq promised U.N. inspectors immediate and
unrestricted access to verify Iraq’s commitment to rid itself of
weapons of mass destruction and long-range missiles. Iraq broke
this promise, spending seven years deceiving, evading, and
harassing U.N. inspectors before ceasing cooperation entirely.
Just months after the 1991 cease-fire, the Security Council twice
renewed its demand that the Iraqi regime cooperate fully with
inspectors, condemning Iraq’s serious violations of its obligations.
The Security Council again renewed that demand in 1994,
and twice more in 1996, deploring Iraq’s clear violations of its
obligations. The Security Council renewed its demand three more
times in 1997, citing flagrant violations; and three more times in
1998, calling Iraq’s behavior totally unacceptable. And in 1999, the
demand was renewed yet again.
As we meet today, it’s been almost four years since the last U.N.
inspectors set foot in Iraq, four years for the Iraqi regime to plan,
————
143

and to build, and to test behind the cloak of secrecy.
We know that Saddam Hussein pursued weapons of mass murder
even when inspectors were in his country. Are we to assume that he
stopped when they left? The history, the logic, and the facts lead to
one conclusion: Saddam Hussein’s regime is a grave and gathering
danger. To suggest otherwise is to hope against the evidence. To
assume this regime’s good faith is to bet the lives of millions and
the peace of the world in a reckless gamble. And this is a risk we
must not take.
Delegates to the General Assembly, we have been more than
patient. We’ve tried sanctions. We’ve tried the carrot of oil for food,
and the stick of coalition military strikes. But Saddam Hussein has
defied all these efforts and continues to develop weapons of mass
destruction. The first time we may be completely certain he has a —
nuclear weapons is when, God forbids, he uses one. We owe it to all
our citizens to do everything in our power to prevent that day from
coming.
The conduct of the Iraqi regime is a threat to the authority of the
United Nations, and a threat to peace. Iraq has answered a decade
of U.N. demands with a decade of defiance. All the world now
faces a test, and the United Nations a difficult and defining moment.
Are Security Council resolutions to be honored and enforced, or
cast aside without consequence? Will the United Nations serve the
purpose of its founding, or will it be irrelevant?
The United States helped found the United Nations. We want
the United Nations to be effective, and respectful, and successful.
We want the resolutions of the world’s most important multilateral
body to be enforced. And right now those resolutions are being
unilaterally subverted by the Iraqi regime. Our partnership of
nations can meet the test before us, by making clear what we now
expect of the Iraqi regime.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will immediately and
unconditionally forswear, disclose, and remove or destroy all
weapons of mass destruction, long-range missiles, and all related
material.
————
144

If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will immediately end all
support for terrorism and act to suppress it, as all states are required
to do by U.N. Security Council resolutions.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will cease persecution of
its civilian population, including Shi’a, Sunnis, Kurds, Turkomans,
and others, again as required by Security Council resolutions.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will release or account for
all Gulf War personnel whose fate is still unknown. It will return
the remains of any who are deceased, return stolen property, accept
liability for losses resulting from the invasion of Kuwait, and fully
cooperate with international efforts to resolve these issues, as
required by Security Council resolutions.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will immediately end
all illicit trade outside the oil-for-food program. It will accept
U.N. administration of funds from that program, to ensure that
the money is used fairly and promptly for the benefit of the Iraqi
people.
If all these steps are taken, it will signal a new openness
and accountability in Iraq. And it could open the prospect of the
United Nations helping to build a government that represents
all Iraqis — a government based on respect for human rights,
economic liberty, and internationally supervised elections.
The United States has no quarrel with the Iraqi people; they’ve
suffered too long in silent captivity. Liberty for the Iraqi people is
a great moral cause, and a great strategic goal. The people of Iraq
deserve it; the security of all nations requires it. Free societies do
not intimidate through cruelty and conquest, and open societies
do not threaten the world with mass murder. The United States
supports political and economic liberty in a unified Iraq.
We can harbor no illusions — and that’s important today to
remember. Saddam Hussein attacked Iran in 1980 and Kuwait
in 1990. He’s fired ballistic missiles at Iran and Saudi Arabia,
Bahrain, and Israel. His regime once ordered the killing of every
person between the ages of 15 and 70 in certain Kurdish villages in
northern Iraq. He has gassed many Iranians, and 40 Iraqi villages.
————
145

My nation will work with the U.N. Security Council to meet
our common challenge. If Iraq’s regime defies us again, the world
must move deliberately, decisively to hold Iraq to account. We will
work with the U.N. Security Council for the necessary resolutions.
But the purposes of the United States should not be doubted. The
Security Council resolutions will be enforced — the just demands
of peace and security will be met — or action will be unavoidable.
And a regime that has lost its legitimacy will also lose its power.
Events can turn in one of two ways: If we fail to act in the
face of danger, the people of Iraq will continue to live in brutal
submission. The regime will have new power to bully and
dominate and conquer its neighbors, condemning the Middle
East to more years of bloodshed and fear. The regime will remain
unstable — the region will remain unstable, with little hope of
freedom, and isolated from the progress of our times. With every
step the Iraqi regime takes toward gaining and deploying the
most terrible weapons, our own options to confront that regime
will narrow. And if an emboldened regime were to supply these
weapons to terrorist allies, then the attacks of September the 11th
would be a prelude to far greater horrors.
If we meet our responsibilities, if we overcome this danger, we
can arrive at a very different future. The people of Iraq can shake
off their captivity. They can one day join a democratic Afghanistan
and a democratic Palestine, inspiring reforms throughout the
Muslim world. These nations can show by their example that
honest government, and respect for women, and the great Islamic
tradition of learning can triumph in the Middle East and beyond.
And we will show that the promise of the United Nations can be
fulfilled in our time.
Neither of these outcomes is certain. Both have been set
before us. We must choose between a world of fear and a world of
progress. We cannot stand by and do nothing while dangers gather.
We must stand up for our security, and for the permanent rights and
the hopes of mankind. By heritage and by choice, the United States
of America will make that stand. And, delegates to the United
————
146

Nations, you have the power to make that stand, as well.
Thank you very much.


Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, members of Congress,
distinguished citizens and fellow citizens: Every year, by law and
by custom, we meet here to consider the state of the union. This
year, we gather in this chamber deeply aware of decisive days that
lie ahead.
You and I serve our country in a time of great consequence.
During this session of Congress, we have the duty to reform
domestic programs vital to our country; we have the opportunity to
save millions of lives abroad from a terrible disease. We will work
for a prosperity that is broadly shared, and we will answer every
danger and every enemy that threatens the American people.
In all these days of promise and days of reckoning, we can be
confident. In a whirlwind of change and hope and peril, our faith is
sure, our resolve is firm, and our union is strong.
This country has many challenges. We will not deny, we
will not ignore, we will not pass along our problems to other
Congresses, to other presidents, and other generations. We will
confront them with focus and clarity and courage.
During the last two years, we have seen what can be
accomplished when we work together. To lift the standards of our
public schools, we achieved historic education reform — which
must now be carried out in every school and in every classroom, so
that every child in America can read and learn and succeed in life.
To protect our country, we reorganized our government and created
the Department of Homeland Security, which is mobilizing against
the threats of a new era. To bring our economy out of recession,
we delivered the largest tax relief in a generation. To insist on
integrity in American business we passed tough reforms, and we
are holding corporate criminals to account.
————
149

Some might call this a good record; I call it a good start.
Tonight I ask the House and Senate to join me in the next bold
steps to serve our fellow citizens.
Our first goal is clear: We must have an economy that grows
fast enough to employ every man and woman who seeks a
job. After recession, terrorist attacks, corporate scandals and
stock market declines, our economy is recovering — yet it’s not
growing fast enough, or strongly enough. With unemployment
rising, our nation needs more small businesses to open, more
companies to invest and expand, more employers to put up the
sign that says, “Help Wanted.”
Jobs are created when the economy grows; the economy
grows when Americans have more money to spend and invest;
and the best and fairest way to make sure Americans have that
money is not to tax it away in the first place.
I am proposing that all the income tax reductions set for 2004
and 2006 be made permanent and effective this year. And under
my plan, as soon as I sign the bill, this extra money will start
showing up in workers’ paychecks. Instead of gradually reducing
the marriage penalty, we should do it now. Instead of slowly
raising the child credit to $1,000, we should send the checks to
American families now.
The tax relief is for everyone who pays income taxes — and
it will help our economy immediately: 92 million Americans will
keep, this year, an average of almost $1,000 more of their own
money. A family of four with an income of $40,000 would see
their federal income taxes fall from $1,178 to $45 per year. Our
plan will improve the bottom line for more than 23 million small
businesses.
You, the Congress, have already passed all these reductions,
and promised them for future years. If this tax relief is good for
Americans three, or five, or seven years from now, it is even better
for Americans today.
We should also strengthen the economy by treating investors
equally in our tax laws. It’s fair to tax a company’s profits. It is
————
150

not fair to again tax the shareholder on the same profits. To boost
investor confidence, and to help the nearly 10 million senior
who receive dividend income, I ask you to end the unfair double
taxation of dividends.
Lower taxes and greater investment will help this economy
expand. More jobs mean more taxpayers, and higher revenues to
our government. The best way to address the deficit and move
toward a balanced budget is to encourage economic growth, and to
show some spending discipline in Washington, D.C.
We must work together to fund only our most important
priorities. I will send you a budget that increases discretionary
spending by 4 percent next year — about as much as the
average family’s income is expected to grow. And that is a good
benchmark for us. Federal spending should not rise any faster than
the paychecks of American families.
A growing economy and a focus on essential priorities will also
be crucial to the future of Social Security. As we continue to work
together to keep Social Security sound and reliable, we must offer
younger workers a chance to invest in retirement accounts that
they will control and they will own.
Our second goal is high quality, affordable health care for
all Americans. The American system of medicine is a model of
skill and innovation, with a pace of discovery that is adding good
years to our lives. Yet for many people, medical care costs too
much — and many have no coverage at all. These problems will
not be solved with a nationalized health care system that dictates
coverage and rations care.
Instead, we must work toward a system in which all Americans
have a good insurance policy, choose their own doctors, and
seniors and low-income Americans receive the help they need.
Instead of bureaucrats and trial lawyers and HMOs, we must
put doctors and nurses and patients back in charge of American
medicine.
Health care reform must begin with Medicare; Medicare is
the binding commitment of a caring society. We must renew that
————
151

commitment by giving seniors access to preventive medicine and
new drugs that are transforming health care in America.
Seniors happy with the current Medicare system should be able
to keep their coverage just the way it is. And just like you — the
members of Congress, and your staffs, and other federal employees
— all seniors should have the choice of a health care plan that
provides prescription drugs.
My budget will commit an additional $400 billion over the
next decade to reform and strengthen Medicare. Leaders of
both political parties have talked for years about strengthening
Medicare. I urge the members of this new Congress to act this year.
To improve our health care system, we must address one of the
prime causes of higher cost, the constant threat that physicians and
hospitals will be unfairly sued. Because of excessive litigation,
everybody pays more for health care, and many parts of America
are losing fine doctors. No one has ever been healed by a frivolous
lawsuit. I urge the Congress to pass medical liability reform.
Our third goal is to promote energy independence for our
country, while dramatically improving the environment. I
have sent you a comprehensive energy plan to promote energy
efficiency and conservation, to develop cleaner technology, and
to produce more energy at home. I have sent you Clear Skies
legislation that mandates a 70-percent cut in air pollution from
power plants over the next 15 years. I have sent you a Healthy
Forests Initiative, to help prevent the catastrophic fires that
devastate communities, kill wildlife, and burn away millions of
acres of treasured forest.
I urge you to pass these measures, for the good of both our
environment and our economy. Even more, I ask you to take a
crucial step and protect our environment in ways that generations
before us could not have imagined.
In this century, the greatest environmental progress will come
about not through endless lawsuits or command-and-control
regulations, but through technology and innovation. Tonight I’m
proposing $1.2 billion in research funding so that America can lead
————
152

the world in developing clean, hydrogen-powered automobiles.
A single chemical reaction between hydrogen and oxygen
generates energy, which can be used to power a car — producing
only water, not exhaust fumes. With a new national commitment,
our scientists and engineers will overcome obstacles to taking these
cars from laboratory to showroom, so that the first car driven by
a child born today could be powered by hydrogen, and pollutionfree.
Join me in this important innovation to make our air
significantly cleaner, and our country much less dependent on
foreign sources of energy.
Our fourth goal is to apply the compassion of America to the
deepest problems of America. For so many in our country — the
homeless and the fatherless, the addicted — the need is great.
Yet there’s power, wonder-working power, in the goodness and
idealism and faith of the American people.
Americans are doing the work of compassion every day —
visiting prisoners, providing shelter for battered women, bringing
companionship to lonely seniors. These good works deserve our
praise; they deserve our personal support; and when appropriate,
they deserve the assistance of the federal government.
I urge you to pass both my faith-based initiative and the Citizen
Service Act, to encourage acts of compassion that can transform
America, one heart and one soul at a time.
Last year, I called on my fellow citizens to participate in the
USA Freedom Corps, which is enlisting tens of thousands of
new volunteers across America. Tonight I ask Congress and the
American people to focus the spirit of service and the resources of
government on the needs of some of our most vulnerable citizens
— boys and girls trying to grow up without guidance and attention,
and children who have to go through a prison gate to be hugged by
their mom or dad.
I propose a $450-million initiative to bring mentors to more
than a million disadvantaged junior high students and children of
prisoners. Government will support the training and recruiting of
————
153

mentors; yet it is the men and women of America who will fill the
need. One mentor, one person can change a life forever. And I urge
you to be that one person.
Another cause of hopelessness is addiction to drugs. Addiction
crowds out friendship, ambition, moral conviction, and reduces all
the richness of life to a single destructive desire. As a government,
we are fighting illegal drugs by cutting off supplies and reducing
demand through anti-drug education programs. Yet for those
already addicted, the fight against drugs is a fight for their own
lives. Too many Americans in search of treatment cannot get it. So
tonight I propose a new $600-million program to help an additional
300,000 Americans receive treatment over the next three years.
Our nation is blessed with recovery programs that do amazing
work. One of them is found at the Healing Place Church in Baton
Rouge, Louisiana. A man in the program said, “God does miracles
in people’s lives, and you never think it could be you.” Tonight,
let us bring to all Americans who struggle with drug addiction this
message of hope: The miracle of recovery is possible, and it could
be you.
By caring for children who need mentors, and for addicted
men and women who need treatment, we are building a more
welcoming society — a culture that values every life. And in this
work we must not overlook the weakest among us. I ask you to
protect infants at the very hour of their birth and end the practice of
partial-birth abortion. And because no human life should be started
or ended as the object of an experiment, I ask you to set a high
standard for humanity, and pass a law against all human cloning.
The qualities of courage and compassion that we strive for in
America also determine our conduct abroad. The American flag
stands for more than our power and our interests. Our founders
dedicated this country to the cause of human dignity, the rights of
every person, and the possibilities of every life. This conviction
leads us into the world to help the afflicted, and defend the peace,
and confound the designs of evil men.
In Afghanistan, we helped liberate an oppressed people. And
————
154

we will continue helping them secure their country, rebuild their
society, and educate all their children — boys and girls. In the
Middle East, we will continue to seek peace between a secure
Israel and a democratic Palestine. Across the Earth, America is
feeding the hungry — more than 60 percent of international food
aid comes as a gift from the people of the United States. As our
nation moves troops and builds alliances to make our world safer,
we must also remember our calling as a blessed country is to make
this world better.
Today, on the continent of Africa, nearly 30 million people
have the AIDS virus — including 3 million children under the age
15. There are whole countries in Africa where more than one-third
of the adult population carries the infection. More than 4 million
require immediate drug treatment. Yet across that continent, only
50,000 AIDS victims — only 50,000 — are receiving the medicine
they need.
Because the AIDS diagnosis is considered a death sentence,
many do not seek treatment. Almost all who do are turned away. A
doctor in rural South Africa describes his frustration. He says, “We
have no medicines. Many hospitals tell people, you’ve got AIDS,
we can’t help you. Go home and die.” In an age of miraculous
medicines, no person should have to hear those words.
AIDS can be prevented. Anti-retroviral drugs can extend life
for many years. And the cost of those drugs has dropped from
$12,000 a year to under $300 a year — which places a tremendous
possibility within our grasp. Ladies and gentlemen, seldom has
history offered a greater opportunity to do so much for so many.
We have confronted, and will continue to confront, HIV/AIDS
in our own country. And to meet a severe and urgent crisis abroad,
tonight I propose the Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief — a work
of mercy beyond all current international efforts to help the people
of Africa. This comprehensive plan will prevent 7 million new
AIDS infections, treat at least 2 million people with life-extending
drugs, and provide humane care for millions of people suffering
from AIDS, and for children orphaned by AIDS.
————
155

I ask the Congress to commit $15 billion over the next five
years, including nearly $10 billion in new money, to turn the
tide against AIDS in the most afflicted nations of Africa and the
Caribbean.
This nation can lead the world in sparing innocent people
from a plague of nature. And this nation is leading the world in
confronting and defeating the man-made evil of international
terrorism.
There are days when our fellow citizens do not hear news
about the war on terror. There’s never a day when I do not learn of
another threat, or receive reports of operations in progress, or give
an order in this global war against a scattered network of killers.
The war goes on, and we are winning.
To date, we’ve arrested or otherwise dealt with many key
commanders of al Qaeda. They include a man who directed
logistics and funding for the September the 11th attacks; the
chief of al Qaeda operations in the Persian Gulf, who planned the
bombings of our embassies in East Africa and the USS Cole; an al
Qaeda operations chief from Southeast Asia; a former director of
al Qaeda’s training camps in Afghanistan; a key al Qaeda operative
in Europe; a major al Qaeda leader in Yemen. All told, more than
3,000 suspected terrorists have been arrested in many countries.
Many others have met a different fate. Let’s put it this way — they
are no longer a problem to the United States and our friends and
allies.
We are working closely with other nations to prevent further
attacks. America and coalition countries have uncovered and
stopped terrorist conspiracies targeting the American embassy in
Yemen, the American embassy in Singapore, a Saudi military base,
ships in the Straits of Hormuz and the Straits the Gibraltar. We’ve
broken al Qaeda cells in Hamburg, Milan, Madrid, London, Paris,
as well as, Buffalo, New York.
We have the terrorists on the run. We’re keeping them on
the run. One by one, the terrorists are learning the meaning of
American justice.
————
156

As we fight this war, we will remember where it began — here,
in our own country. This government is taking unprecedented
measures to protect our people and defend our homeland. We’ve
intensified security at the borders and ports of entry, posted more
than 50,000 newly-trained federal screeners in airports, begun
inoculating troops and first responders against smallpox, and are
deploying the nation’s first early warning network of sensors to
detect biological attack. And this year, for the first time, we are
beginning to field a defense to protect this nation against ballistic
missiles.
I thank the Congress for supporting these measures. I ask you
tonight to add to our future security with a major research and
production effort to guard our people against bioterrorism, called
Project Bioshield. The budget I send you will propose almost $6
billion to quickly make available effective vaccines and treatments
against agents like anthrax, botulinum toxin, Ebola, and plague.
We must assume that our enemies would use these diseases as
weapons, and we must act before the dangers are upon us.
Since September the 11th, our intelligence and law
enforcement agencies have worked more closely than ever to
track and disrupt the terrorists. The FBI is improving its ability to
analyze intelligence, and is transforming itself to meet new threats.
Tonight, I am instructing the leaders of the FBI, the CIA, the
Homeland Security, and the Department of Defense to develop a
Terrorist Threat Integration Center, to merge and analyze all threat
information in a single location. Our government must have the
very best information possible, and we will use it to make sure the
right people are in the right places to protect all our citizens.
Our war against terror is a contest of will in which
perseverance is power. In the ruins of two towers, at the western
wall of the Pentagon, on a field in Pennsylvania, this nation made
a pledge, and we renew that pledge tonight: Whatever the duration
of this struggle, and whatever the difficulties, we will not permit
the triumph of violence in the affairs of men — free people will set
the course of history.
————
157

Today, the gravest danger in the war on terror, the gravest
danger facing America and the world, is outlaw regimes that seek
and possess nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons. These
regimes could use such weapons for blackmail, terror, and mass
murder. They could also give or sell those weapons to terrorist
allies, who would use them without the least hesitation.
This threat is new; America’s duty is familiar. Throughout the
20th century, small groups of men seized control of great nations,
built armies and arsenals, and set out to dominate the weak and
intimidate the world. In each case, their ambitions of cruelty and
murder had no limit. In each case, the ambitions of Hitlerism,
militarism, and communism were defeated by the will of free
peoples, by the strength of great alliances, and by the might of the
United States of America.
Now, in this century, the ideology of power and domination has
appeared again, and seeks to gain the ultimate weapons of terror.
Once again, this nation and all our friends are all that stand
between a world at peace, and a world of chaos and constant alarm.
Once again, we are called to defend the safety of our people, and
the hopes of all mankind. And we accept this responsibility.
America is making a broad and determined effort to confront
these dangers. We have called on the United Nations to fulfill its
charter and stand by its demand that Iraq disarm. We’re strongly
supporting the International Atomic Energy Agency in its mission
to track and control nuclear materials around the world. We’re
working with other governments to secure nuclear materials in the
former Soviet Union, and to strengthen global treaties banning the
production and shipment of missile technologies and weapons of
mass destruction.
In all these efforts, however, America’s purpose is more than
to follow a process — it is to achieve a result: the end of terrible
threats to the civilized world. All free nations have a stake in
preventing sudden and catastrophic attacks. And we’re asking them
to join us, and many are doing so. Yet the course of this nation
does not depend on the decisions of others. Whatever action is
————
158

required, whenever action is necessary, I will defend the freedom
and security of the American people.
Different threats require different strategies. In Iran, we
continue to see a government that represses its people, pursues
weapons of mass destruction, and supports terror. We also see
Iranian citizens risking intimidation and death as they speak out for
liberty and human rights and democracy. Iranians, like all people,
have a right to choose their own government and determine their
own destiny — and the United States supports their aspirations to
live in freedom.
On the Korean Peninsula, an oppressive regime rules a people
living in fear and starvation. Throughout the 1990s, the United
States relied on a negotiated framework to keep North Korea from
gaining nuclear weapons. We now know that that regime was
deceiving the world, and developing those weapons all along. And
today the North Korean regime is using its nuclear program to
incite fear and seek concessions. America and the world will not be
blackmailed.
America is working with the countries of the region — South
Korea, Japan, China, and Russia — to find a peaceful solution, and
to show the North Korean government that nuclear weapons will
bring only isolation, economic stagnation, and continued hardship.
The North Korean regime will find respect in the world and revival
for its people only when it turns away from its nuclear ambitions.
Our nation and the world must learn the lessons of the Korean
Peninsula and not allow an even greater threat to rise up in Iraq.
A brutal dictator, with a history of reckless aggression, with ties
to terrorism, with great potential wealth, will not be permitted to
dominate a vital region and threaten the United States.
Twelve years ago, Saddam Hussein faced the prospect of being
the last casualty in a war he had started and lost. To spare himself,
he agreed to disarm of all weapons of mass destruction. For the
next 12 years, he systematically violated that agreement. He
pursued chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons, even while
inspectors were in his country. Nothing to date has restrained him
————
159

from his pursuit of these weapons — not economic sanctions, not
isolation from the civilized world, not even cruise missile strikes on
his military facilities.
Almost three months ago, the United Nations Security Council
gave Saddam Hussein his final chance to disarm. He has shown
instead utter contempt for the United Nations, and for the opinion
of the world. The 108 U.N. inspectors were sent to conduct — were
not sent to conduct a scavenger hunt for hidden materials across a
country the size of California. The job of the inspectors is to verify
that Iraq’s regime is disarming. It is up to Iraq to show exactly
where it is hiding its banned weapons, lay those weapons out for
the world to see, and destroy them as directed. Nothing like this has
happened.
The United Nations concluded in 1999 that Saddam Hussein
had biological weapons sufficient to produce over 25,000 liters of
anthrax — enough doses to kill several million people. He hasn’t
accounted for that material. He’s given no evidence that he has
destroyed it.
The United Nations concluded that Saddam Hussein had
materials sufficient to produce more than 38,000 liters of
botulinum toxin — enough to subject millions of people to death
by respiratory failure. He hadn’t accounted for that material. He’s
given no evidence that he has destroyed it.
Our intelligence officials estimate that Saddam Hussein had the
materials to produce as much as 500 tons of sarin, mustard and VX
nerve agent. In such quantities, these chemical agents could also
kill untold thousands. He’s not accounted for these materials. He
has given no evidence that he has destroyed them.
U.S. intelligence indicates that Saddam Hussein had upwards of
30,000 munitions capable of delivering chemical agents. Inspectors
recently turned up 16 of them — despite Iraq’s recent declaration
denying their existence. Saddam Hussein has not accounted for
the remaining 29,984 of these prohibited munitions. He’s given no
evidence that he has destroyed them.
From three Iraqi defectors we know that Iraq, in the late 1990s,
————
160

had several mobile biological weapons labs. These are designed to
produce germ warfare agents, and can be moved from place to a
place to evade inspectors. Saddam Hussein has not disclosed these
facilities. He’s given no evidence that he has destroyed them.
The International Atomic Energy Agency confirmed in the
1990s that Saddam Hussein had an advanced nuclear weapons
development program, had a design for a nuclear weapon and
was working on five different methods of enriching uranium for a
bomb. The British government has learned that Saddam Hussein
recently sought significant quantities of uranium from Africa. Our
intelligence sources tell us that he has attempted to purchase highstrength aluminum tubes suitable for nuclear weapons production.
Saddam Hussein has not credibly explained these activities. He
clearly has much to hide.
The dictator of Iraq is not disarming. To the contrary; he is
deceiving. From intelligence sources we know, for instance, that
thousands of Iraqi security personnel are at work hiding documents
and materials from the U.N. inspectors, sanitizing inspection
sites and monitoring the inspectors themselves. Iraqi officials
accompany the inspectors in order to intimidate witnesses.
Iraq is blocking U-2 surveillance flights requested by the
United Nations. Iraqi intelligence officers are posing as the
scientists inspectors are supposed to interview. Real scientists have
been coached by Iraqi officials on what to say. Intelligence sources
indicate that Saddam Hussein has ordered that scientists who
cooperate with U.N. inspectors in disarming Iraq will be killed,
along with their families.
Year after year, Saddam Hussein has gone to elaborate lengths,
spent enormous sums, taken great risks to build and keep weapons
of mass destruction. But why? The only possible explanation, the
only possible use he could have for those weapons, is to dominate,
intimidate, or attack.
With nuclear arms or a full arsenal of chemical and biological
weapons, Saddam Hussein could resume his ambitions of conquest
in the Middle East and create deadly havoc in that region. And this
————
161

Congress and the America people must recognize another threat.
Evidence from intelligence sources, secret communications, and
statements by people now in custody reveal that Saddam Hussein
aids and protects terrorists, including members of al Qaeda.
Secretly, and without fingerprints, he could provide one of his
hidden weapons to terrorists, or help them develop their own.
Before September the 11th, many in the world believed that
Saddam Hussein could be contained. But chemical agents, lethal
viruses and shadowy terrorist networks are not easily contained.
Imagine those 19 hijackers with other weapons and other plans —
this time armed by Saddam Hussein. It would take one vial, one
canister, one crate slipped into this country to bring a day of horror
like none we have ever known. We will do everything in our power
to make sure that that day never comes.
Some have said we must not act until the threat is imminent.
Since when have terrorists and tyrants announced their intentions,
politely putting us on notice before they strike? If this threat is
permitted to fully and suddenly emerge, all actions, all words,
and all recriminations would come too late. Trusting in the sanity
and restraint of Saddam Hussein is not a strategy, and it is not an
option.
The dictator who is assembling the world’s most dangerous
weapons has already used them on whole villages — leaving
thousands of his own citizens dead, blind, or disfigured. Iraqi
refugees tell us how forced confessions are obtained — by
torturing children while their parents are made to watch.
International human rights groups have catalogued other methods
used in the torture chambers of Iraq: electric shock, burning with
hot irons, dripping acid on the skin, mutilation with electric drills,
cutting out tongues, and rape. If this is not evil, then evil has no
meaning.
And tonight I have a message for the brave and oppressed
people of Iraq: Your enemy is not surrounding your country —
your enemy is ruling your country. And the day he and his regime
are removed from power will be the day of your liberation.
————
162

The world has waited 12 years for Iraq to disarm. America will
not accept a serious and mounting threat to our country, and our
friends and our allies. The United States will ask the U.N. Security
Council to convene on February the 5th to consider the facts of
Iraq’s ongoing defiance of the world. Secretary of State Powell will
present information and intelligence about Iraqi’s legal — Iraq’s
illegal weapons programs, its attempt to hide those weapons from
inspectors, and its links to terrorist groups.
We will consult. But let there be no misunderstanding: If
Saddam Hussein does not fully disarm, for the safety of our people
and for the peace of the world, we will lead a coalition to disarm
him.
Tonight I have a message for the men and women who will
keep the peace, members of the American Armed Forces: Many of
you are assembling in or near the Middle East, and some crucial
hours may lay ahead. In those hours, the success of our cause will
depend on you. Your training has prepared you. Your honor will
guide you. You believe in America, and America believes in you.
Sending Americans into battle is the most profound decision a
President can make. The technologies of war have changed; the
risks and suffering of war have not. For the brave Americans who
bear the risk, no victory is free from sorrow. This nation fights
reluctantly, because we know the cost and we dread the days of
mourning that always come.
We seek peace. We strive for peace. And sometimes peace must
be defended. A future lived at the mercy of terrible threats is no
peace at all. If war is forced upon us, we will fight in a just cause
and by just means — sparing, in every way we can, the innocent.
And if war is forced upon us, we will fight with the full force and
might of the United States military — and we will prevail.
And as we and our coalition partners are doing in Afghanistan,
we will bring to the Iraqi people food and medicines and supplies
— and freedom.
Many challenges, abroad and at home, have arrived in a
single season. In two years, America has gone from a sense of
————
163

invulnerability to an awareness of peril; from bitter division in
small matters to calm unity in great causes. And we go forward
with confidence, because this call of history has come to the right
country.
Americans are a resolute people who have risen to every test
of our time. Adversity has revealed the character of our country,
to the world and to ourselves. America is a strong nation, and
honorable in the use of our strength. We exercise power without
conquest, and we sacrifice for the liberty of strangers.
Americans are a free people, who know that freedom is the
right of every person and the future of every nation. The liberty we
prize is not America’s gift to the world, it is God’s gift to humanity.
We Americans have faith in ourselves, but not in ourselves
alone. We do not know — we do not claim to know all the ways of
Providence, yet we can trust in them, placing our confidence in the
loving God behind all of life, and all of history.
May He guide us now. And may God continue to bless the
United States of America.

My fellow Americans, this day has brought terrible news and
great sadness to our country. At 9:00 a.m. this morning, Mission
Control in Houston lost contact with our Space Shuttle Columbia.
A short time later, debris was seen falling from the skies above
Texas. The Columbia is lost; there are no survivors.
On board was a crew of seven: Colonel Rick Husband; Lt.
Colonel Michael Anderson; Commander Laurel Clark; Captain
David Brown; Commander William McCool; Dr. Kalpana Chawla;
and Ilan Ramon, a Colonel in the Israeli Air Force. These men and
women assumed great risk in the service to all humanity.
In an age when space flight has come to seem almost routine,
it is easy to overlook the dangers of travel by rocket, and the
difficulties of navigating the fierce outer atmosphere of the Earth.
These astronauts knew the dangers, and they faced them willingly,
knowing they had a high and noble purpose in life. Because of
their courage and daring and idealism, we will miss them all the
more.
All Americans today are thinking, as well, of the families of
these men and women who have been given this sudden shock and
grief. You’re not alone. Our entire nation grieves with you. And
those you loved will always have the respect and gratitude of this
country.
The cause in which they died will continue. Mankind is led
into the darkness beyond our world by the inspiration of discovery
and the longing to understand. Our journey into space will go on.
In the skies today we saw destruction and tragedy. Yet farther
than we can see there is comfort and hope. In the words of the
prophet Isaiah, “Lift your eyes and look to the heavens. Who
————
165

created all these? He who brings out the starry hosts one by one
and calls them each by name. Because of His great power and
mighty strength, not one of them is missing.”
The same Creator who names the stars also knows the names
of the seven souls we mourn today. The crew of the shuttle
Columbia did not return safely to Earth; yet we can pray that all
are safely home.
May God bless the grieving families, and may God continue
to bless America.

Thanks for the warm welcome. I’m proud to be with the
scholars, and the friends, and the supporters of the American
Enterprise Institute. I want to thank you for overlooking my dress
code violation. They were about to stop me at the door, but Irving
Kristol said, “I know this guy, let him in.”
Chris, thank you for your very kind introduction, and thank
you for your leadership. I see many distinguished guests here
tonight — members of my Cabinet, members of Congress, Justice
Scalia, Justice Thomas, and so many respected writers and policy
experts. I’m always happy to see your Senior Fellow, Dr. Lynne
Cheney. Lynne is a wise and thoughtful commentator on history
and culture, and a dear friend to Laura and me. I’m also familiar
with the good work of her husband — You may remember him,
the former director of my vice presidential search committee.
Thank God Dick Cheney said yes.
Thanks for fitting me into the program tonight. I know I’m not
the featured speaker. I’m just a warm-up act for Allan Meltzer. But
I want to congratulate Dr. Meltzer for a lifetime of achievement,
and for tonight’s well-deserved honor. Congratulations.
At the American Enterprise Institute, some of the finest minds
in our nation are at work on some of the greatest challenges
to our nation. You do such good work that my administration
has borrowed 20 such minds. I want to thank them for their
service, but I also want to remind people that for 60 years, AEI
scholars have made vital contributions to our country and to our
government, and we are grateful for those contributions.
We meet here during a crucial period in the history of our
nation, and of the civilized world. Part of that history was written
by others; the rest will be written by us. On a September morning,
————
167

threats that had gathered for years, in secret and far away, led to
murder in our country on a massive scale. As a result, we must
look at security in a new way, because our country is a battlefield
in the first war of the 21st century.
We learned a lesson: The dangers of our time must be
confronted actively and forcefully, before we see them again in
our skies and in our cities. And we set a goal: we will not allow the
triumph of hatred and violence in the affairs of men.
Our coalition of more than 90 countries is pursuing the
networks of terror with every tool of law enforcement and with
military power. We have arrested, or otherwise dealt with, many
key commanders of al Qaeda. Across the world, we are hunting
down the killers one by one. We are winning. And we’re showing
them the definition of American justice. And we are opposing the
greatest danger in the war on terror: outlaw regimes arming with
weapons of mass destruction.
In Iraq, a dictator is building and hiding weapons that could
enable him to dominate the Middle East and intimidate the
civilized world — and we will not allow it. This same tyrant has
close ties to terrorist organizations, and could supply them with
the terrible means to strike this country — and America will not
permit it. The danger posed by Saddam Hussein and his weapons
cannot be ignored or wished away. The danger must be confronted.
We hope that the Iraqi regime will meet the demands of the United
Nations and disarm, fully and peacefully. If it does not, we are
prepared to disarm Iraq by force. Either way, this danger will be
removed.
The safety of the American people depends on ending this
direct and growing threat. Acting against the danger will also
contribute greatly to the long-term safety and stability of our
world. The current Iraqi regime has shown the power of tyranny
to spread discord and violence in the Middle East. A liberated Iraq
can show the power of freedom to transform that vital region, by
bringing hope and progress into the lives of millions. America’s
interests in security, and America’s belief in liberty, both lead in
————
168

the same direction: to a free and peaceful Iraq.
The first to benefit from a free Iraq would be the Iraqi people,
themselves. Today they live in scarcity and fear, under a dictator
who has brought them nothing but war, and misery, and torture.
Their lives and their freedom matter little to Saddam Hussein —
but Iraqi lives and freedom matter greatly to us.
Bringing stability and unity to a free Iraq will not be easy. Yet
that is no excuse to leave the Iraqi regime’s torture chambers and
poison labs in operation. Any future the Iraqi people choose for
themselves will be better than the nightmare world that Saddam
Hussein has chosen for them.
If we must use force, the United States and our coalition
stand ready to help the citizens of a liberated Iraq. We will deliver
medicine to the sick, and we are now moving into place nearly 3
million emergency rations to feed the hungry.
We’ll make sure that Iraq’s 55,000 food distribution sites,
operating under the Oil For Food program, are stocked and open
as soon as possible. The United States and Great Britain are
providing tens of millions of dollars to the U.N. High Commission
on Refugees, and to such groups as the World Food Program and
UNICEF, to provide emergency aid to the Iraqi people.
We will also lead in carrying out the urgent and dangerous
work of destroying chemical and biological weapons. We will
provide security against those who try to spread chaos, or settle
scores, or threaten the territorial integrity of Iraq. We will seek to
protect Iraq’s natural resources from sabotage by a dying regime,
and ensure those resources are used for the benefit of the owners —
the Iraqi people.
The United States has no intention of determining the precise
form of Iraq’s new government. That choice belongs to the Iraqi
people. Yet, we will ensure that one brutal dictator is not replaced
by another. All Iraqis must have a voice in the new government,
and all citizens must have their rights protected.
Rebuilding Iraq will require a sustained commitment from
many nations, including our own: we will remain in Iraq as long
————
169

as necessary, and not a day more. America has made and kept this
kind of commitment before — in the peace that followed a world
war. After defeating enemies, we did not leave behind occupying
armies, we left constitutions and parliaments. We established an
atmosphere of safety, in which responsible, reform-minded local
leaders could build lasting institutions of freedom. In societies that
once bred fascism and militarism, liberty found a permanent home.
There was a time when many said that the cultures of Japan and
Germany were incapable of sustaining democratic values. Well,
they were wrong. Some say the same of Iraq today. They are
mistaken. The nation of Iraq — with its proud heritage, abundant
resources and skilled and educated people — is fully capable of
moving toward democracy and living in freedom.
The world has a clear interest in the spread of democratic
values, because stable and free nations do not breed the ideologies
of murder. They encourage the peaceful pursuit of a better life. And
there are hopeful signs of a desire for freedom in the Middle East.
Arab intellectuals have called on Arab governments to address the
“freedom gap” so their peoples can fully share in the progress of
our times. Leaders in the region speak of a new Arab charter that
champions internal reform, greater politics participation, economic
openness, and free trade. And from Morocco to Bahrain and
beyond, nations are taking genuine steps toward politics reform.
A new regime in Iraq would serve as a dramatic and inspiring
example of freedom for other nations in the region.
It is presumptuous and insulting to suggest that a whole region
of the world — or the one-fifth of humanity that is Muslim — is
somehow untouched by the most basic aspirations of life. Human
cultures can be vastly different. Yet the human heart desires the
same good things, everywhere on Earth. In our desire to be safe
from brutal and bullying oppression, human beings are the same.
In our desire to care for our children and give them a better life,
we are the same. For these fundamental reasons, freedom and
democracy will always and everywhere have greater appeal than
the slogans of hatred and the tactics of terror.
————
170

Success in Iraq could also begin a new stage for Middle Eastern
peace, and set in motion progress towards a truly democratic
Palestinian state. The passing of Saddam Hussein’s regime will
deprive terrorist networks of a wealthy patron that pays for terrorist
training, and offers rewards to families of suicide bombers. And
other regimes will be given a clear warning that support for terror
will not be tolerated.
Without this outside support for terrorism, Palestinians who
are working for reform and long for democracy will be in a better
position to choose new leaders. True leaders who strive for peace;
true leaders who faithfully serve the people. A Palestinian state
must be a reformed and peaceful state that abandons forever the use
of terror.
For its part, the new government of Israel — as the terror
threat is removed and security improves — will be expected to
support the creation of a viable Palestinian state and to work as
quickly as possible toward a final status agreement. As progress is
made toward peace, settlement activity in the occupied territories
must end. And the Arab states will be expected to meet their
responsibilities to oppose terrorism, to support the emergence of a
peaceful and democratic Palestine, and state clearly they will live in
peace with Israel.
The United States and other nations are working on a road
map for peace. We are setting out the necessary conditions for
progress toward the goal of two states, Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security. It is the commitment of our
government — and my personal commitment — to implement
the road map and to reach that goal. Old patterns of conflict in the
Middle East can be broken, if all concerned will let go of bitterness,
hatred, and violence, and get on with the serious work of economic
development, and political reform, and reconciliation. America
will seize every opportunity in pursuit of peace. And the end of the
present regime in Iraq would create such an opportunity.
In confronting Iraq, the United States is also showing our
commitment to effective international institutions. We are a
————
171

permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. We
helped to create the Security Council. We believe in the Security
Council — so much that we want its words to have meaning.
The global threat of proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction cannot be confronted by one nation alone. The world
needs today and will need tomorrow international bodies with the
authority and the will to stop the spread of terror and chemical and
biological and nuclear weapons. A threat to all must be answered
by all. High-minded pronouncements against proliferation mean
little unless the strongest nations are willing to stand behind them
— and use force if necessary. After all, the United Nations was
created, as Winston Churchill said, to “make sure that the force of
right will, in the ultimate issue, be protected by the right of force.”
Another resolution is now before the Security Council. If
the council responds to Iraq’s defiance with more excuses and
delays, if all its authority proves to be empty, the United Nations
will be severely weakened as a source of stability and order. If
the members rise to this moment, then the Council will fulfill its
founding purpose.
I’ve listened carefully, as people and leaders around the world
have made known their desire for peace. All of us want peace. The
threat to peace does not come from those who seek to enforce the
just demands of the civilized world; the threat to peace comes from
those who flout those demands. If we have to act, we will act to
restrain the violent, and defend the cause of peace. And by acting,
we will signal to outlaw regimes that in this new century, the
boundaries of civilized behavior will be respected.
Protecting those boundaries carries a cost. If war is forced
upon us by Iraq’s refusal to disarm, we will meet an enemy
who hides his military forces behind civilians, who has terrible
weapons, who is capable of any crime. The dangers are real, as our
soldiers, and sailors, airmen, and Marines fully understand. Yet, no
military has ever been better prepared to meet these challenges.
Members of our Armed Forces also understand why they
may be called to fight. They know that retreat before a dictator
————
172

guarantees even greater sacrifices in the future. They know that
America’s cause is right and just: liberty for an oppressed people,
and security for the American people. And I know something about
these men and women who wear our uniform: they will complete
every mission they are given with skill, and honor, and courage.
Much is asked of America in this year 2003. The work ahead is
demanding. It will be difficult to help freedom take hold in a
country that has known three decades of dictatorship, secret police,
internal divisions, and war. It will be difficult to cultivate liberty
and peace in the Middle East, after so many generations of strife.
Yet, the security of our nation and the hope of millions depend on
us, and Americans do not turn away from duties because they are
hard. We have met great tests in other times, and we will meet the
tests of our time.
We go forward with confidence, because we trust in the power
of human freedom to change lives and nations. By the resolve and
purpose of America, and of our friends and allies, we will make
this an age of progress and liberty. Free people will set the course
of history, and free people will keep the peace of the world.
Thank you all, very much.

My fellow citizens, at this hour, American and coalition forces
are in the early stages of military operations to disarm Iraq, to free
its people and to defend the world from grave danger.
On my orders, coalition forces have begun striking selected
targets of military importance to undermine Saddam Hussein’s
ability to wage war. These are opening stages of what will be a
broad and concerted campaign. More than 35 countries are giving
crucial support — from the use of naval and air bases, to help with
intelligence and logistics, to the deployment of combat units. Every
nation in this coalition has chosen to bear the duty and share the
honor of serving in our common defense.
To all the men and women of the United States Armed Forces
now in the Middle East, the peace of a troubled world and the
hopes of an oppressed people now depend on you. That trust is
well placed.
The enemies you confront will come to know your skill and
bravery. The people you liberate will witness the honorable and
decent spirit of the American military. In this conflict, America
faces an enemy who has no regard for conventions of war or rules
of morality. Saddam Hussein has placed Iraqi troops and equipment
in civilian areas, attempting to use innocent men, women and
children as shields for his own military — a final atrocity against
his people.
I want Americans and all the world to know that coalition
forces will make every effort to spare innocent civilians from harm.
A campaign on the harsh terrain of a nation as large as California
could be longer and more difficult than some predict. And helping
Iraqis achieve a united, stable and free country will require our
————
175

sustained commitment.
We come to Iraq with respect for its citizens, for their great
civilization and for the religious faiths they practice. We have no
ambition in Iraq, except to remove a threat and restore control of
that country to its own people.
I know that the families of our military are praying that all
those who serve will return safely and soon. Millions of Americans
are praying with you for the safety of your loved ones and for
the protection of the innocent. For your sacrifice, you have the
gratitude and respect of the American people. And you can know
that our forces will be coming home as soon as their work is done.
Our nation enters this conflict reluctantly — yet, our purpose is
sure. The people of the United States and our friends and allies will
not live at the mercy of an outlaw regime that threatens the peace
with weapons of mass murder. We will meet that threat now, with
our Army, Air Force, Navy, Coast Guard and Marines, so that we
do not have to meet it later with armies of fire fighters and police
and doctors on the streets of our cities.
Now that conflict has come, the only way to limit its duration
is to apply decisive force. And I assure you, this will not be a
campaign of half measures, and we will accept no outcome but
victory.
My fellow citizens, the dangers to our country and the world
will be overcome. We will pass through this time of peril and carry
on the work of peace. We will defend our freedom. We will bring
freedom to others and we will prevail.
May God bless our country and all who defend her.


Thank you all very much. Please be seated. Thanks for the
warm welcome, and thanks for inviting me to join you in this 20th
anniversary of the National Endowment for Democracy. The staff
and directors of this organization have seen a lot of history over the
last two decades, you’ve been a part of that history. By speaking for
and standing for freedom, you’ve lifted the hopes of people around
the world, and you’ve brought great credit to America.
I appreciate Vin for the short introduction. I’m a man who
likes short introductions. And he didn’t let me down. But more
importantly, I appreciate the invitation. I appreciate the members
of Congress who are here, senators from both political parties,
members of the House of Representatives from both political
parties. I appreciate the ambassadors who are here. I appreciate
the guests who have come. I appreciate the bipartisan spirit, the
nonpartisan spirit of the National Endowment for Democracy.
I’m glad that Republicans and Democrats and independents are
working together to advance human liberty.
The roots of our democracy can be traced to England, and to its
Parliament — and so can the roots of this organization. In June of
1982, President Ronald Reagan spoke at Westminster Palace and
declared, the turning point had arrived in history. He argued that
Soviet communism had failed, precisely because it did not respect
its own people — their creativity, their genius and their rights.
President Reagan said that the day of Soviet tyranny was
passing, that freedom had a momentum which would not be halted.
He gave this organization its mandate: to add to the momentum of
freedom across the world. Your mandate was important 20 years
ago; it is equally important today.
A number of critics were dismissive of that speech by the
————
177

President. According to one editorial of the time, “It seems hard
to be a sophisticated European and also an admirer of Ronald
Reagan.” Some observers on both sides of the Atlantic pronounced
the speech simplistic and naive, and even dangerous. In fact,
Ronald Reagan’s words were courageous and optimistic and
entirely correct.
The great democratic movement President Reagan described
was already well underway. In the early 1970s, there were about 40
democracies in the world. By the middle of that decade, Portugal
and Spain and Greece held free elections. Soon there were new
democracies in Latin America, and free institutions were spreading
in Korea, in Taiwan, and in East Asia. This very week in 1989,
there were protests in East Berlin and in Leipzig. By the end of
that year, every communist dictatorship in Central [Europe] had
collapsed. Within another year, the South African government
released Nelson Mandela. Four years later, he was elected
president of his country — ascending, like Walesa and Havel, from
prisoner of state to head of state.
As the 20th century ended, there were around 120 democracies
in the world — and I can assure you more are on the way. Ronald
Reagan would be pleased, and he would not be surprised.
We’ve witnessed, in little over a generation, the swiftest
advance of freedom in the 2,500 year story of democracy.
Historians in the future will offer their own explanations for why
this happened. Yet we already know some of the reasons they will
cite. It is no accident that the rise of so many democracies took
place in a time when the world’s most influential nation was itself a
democracy.
The United States made military and moral commitments in
Europe and Asia, which protected free nations from aggression,
and created the conditions in which new democracies could
flourish. As we provided security for whole nations, we also
provided inspiration for oppressed peoples. In prison camps, in
banned union meetings, in clandestine churches, men and women
knew that the whole world was not sharing their own nightmare.
————
178

They knew of at least one place — a bright and hopeful land
— where freedom was valued and secure. And they prayed that
America would not forget them, or forget the mission to promote
liberty around the world.
Historians will note that in many nations, the advance of
markets and free enterprise helped to create a middle class that was
confident enough to demand their own rights. They will point to the
role of technology in frustrating censorship and central control —
and marvel at the power of instant communications to spread the
truth, the news, and courage across borders.
Historians in the future will reflect on an extraordinary,
undeniable fact: Over time, free nations grow stronger and
dictatorships grow weaker. In the middle of the 20th century,
some imagined that the central planning and social regimentation
were a shortcut to national strength. In fact, the prosperity, and
social vitality and technological progress of a people are directly
determined by extent of their liberty. Freedom honors and unleashes
human creativity — and creativity determines the strength and
wealth of nations. Liberty is both the plan of Heaven for humanity,
and the best hope for progress here on Earth.
The progress of liberty is a powerful trend. Yet, we also know
that liberty, if not defended, can be lost. The success of freedom
is not determined by some dialectic of history. By definition,
the success of freedom rests upon the choices and the courage
of free peoples, and upon their willingness to sacrifice. In the
trenches of World War I, through a two-front war in the 1940s, the
difficult battles of Korea and Vietnam, and in missions of rescue
and liberation on nearly every continent, Americans have amply
displayed our willingness to sacrifice for liberty.
The sacrifices of Americans have not always been recognized
or appreciated, yet they have been worthwhile. Because we and our
allies were steadfast, Germany and Japan are democratic nations
that no longer threaten the world. A global nuclear standoff with
the Soviet Union ended peacefully — as did the Soviet Union.
The nations of Europe are moving towards unity, not dividing into
————
179

armed camps and descending into genocide. Every nation has
learned, or should have learned, an important lesson: Freedom is
worth fighting for, dying for, and standing for — and the advance
of freedom leads to peace.
And now we must apply that lesson in our own time. We’ve
reached another great turning point — and the resolve we show
will shape the next stage of the world democratic movement.
Our commitment to democracy is tested in countries like
Cuba and Burma and North Korea and Zimbabwe — outposts
of oppression in our world. The people in these nations live in
captivity, and fear and silence. Yet, these regimes cannot hold
back freedom forever — and, one day, from prison camps and
prison cells, and from exile, the leaders of new democracies will
arrive. Communism, and militarism and rule by the capricious and
corrupt are the relics of a passing era. And we will stand with these
oppressed peoples until the day of their freedom finally arrives.
Our commitment to democracy is tested in China. That nation
now has a sliver, a fragment of liberty. Yet, China’s people will
eventually want their liberty pure and whole. China has discovered
that economic freedom leads to national wealth. China’s leaders
will also discover that freedom is indivisible — that social and
religious freedom is also essential to national greatness and
national dignity. Eventually, men and women who are allowed to
control their own wealth will insist on controlling their own lives
and their own country.
Our commitment to democracy is also tested in the Middle
East, which is my focus today, and must be a focus of American
policy for decades to come. In many nations of the Middle East —
countries of great strategic importance — democracy has not yet
taken root. And the questions arise: Are the peoples of the Middle
East somehow beyond the reach of liberty? Are millions of men
and women and children condemned by history or culture to live
in despotism? Are they alone never to know freedom, and never
even to have a choice in the matter? I, for one, do not believe it. I
believe every person has the ability and the right to be free.
————
180

Some skeptics of democracy assert that the traditions of Islam
are inhospitable to the representative government. This “cultural
condescension,” as Ronald Reagan termed it, has a long history.
After the Japanese surrender in 1945, a so-called Japan expert
asserted that democracy in that former empire would “never work.”
Another observer declared the prospects for democracy in postHitler Germany are, and I quote, “most uncertain at best” — he
made that claim in 1957. Seventy-four years ago, The Sunday
London Times declared nine-tenths of the population of India
to be “illiterates not caring a fig for politics.” Yet when Indian
democracy was imperiled in the 1970s, the Indian people showed
their commitment to liberty in a national referendum that saved
their form of government.
Time after time, observers have questioned whether this
country, or that people, or this group, are “ready” for democracy —
as if freedom were a prize you win for meeting our own Western
standards of progress. In fact, the daily work of democracy itself
is the path of progress. It teaches cooperation, the free exchange
of ideas, and the peaceful resolution of differences. As men and
women are showing, from Bangladesh to Botswana, to Mongolia,
it is the practice of democracy that makes a nation ready for
democracy, and every nation can start on this path.
It should be clear to all that Islam — the faith of one-fifth
of humanity — is consistent with democratic rule. Democratic
progress is found in many predominantly Muslim countries — in
Turkey and Indonesia, and Senegal and Albania, Niger and Sierra
Leone. Muslim men and women are good citizens of India and
South Africa, of the nations of Western Europe, and of the United
States of America.
More than half of all the Muslims in the world live in freedom
under democratically constituted governments. They succeed in
democratic societies, not in spite of their faith, but because of
it. A religion that demands individual moral accountability, and
encourages the encounter of the individual with God, is fully
compatible with the rights and responsibilities of self-government.
————
181

Yet there’s a great challenge today in the Middle East. In
the words of a recent report by Arab scholars, the global wave
of democracy has — and I quote — “barely reached the Arab
states.” They continue: “This freedom deficit undermines human
development and is one of the most painful manifestations of
lagging political development.” The freedom deficit they describe
has terrible consequences, of the people of the Middle East and
for the world. In many Middle Eastern countries, poverty is deep
and it is spreading, women lack rights and are denied schooling.
Whole societies remain stagnant while the world moves ahead.
These are not the failures of a culture or a religion. These are the
failures of political and economic doctrines.
As the colonial era passed away, the Middle East saw the
establishment of many military dictatorships. Some rulers
adopted the dogmas of socialism, seized total control of political
parties and the media and universities. They allied themselves
with the Soviet bloc and with international terrorism. Dictators
in Iraq and Syria promised the restoration of national honor, a
return to ancient glories. They’ve left instead a legacy of torture,
oppression, misery, and ruin.
Other men, and groups of men, have gained influence in
the Middle East and beyond through an ideology of theocratic
terror. Behind their language of religion is the ambition for
absolute political power. Ruling cabals like the Taliban show their
version of religious piety in public whippings of women, ruthless
suppression of any difference or dissent, and support for terrorists
who arm and train to murder the innocent. The Taliban promised
religious purity and national pride. Instead, by systematically
destroying a proud and working society, they left behind suffering
and starvation.
Many Middle Eastern governments now understand that
military dictatorship and theocratic rule are a straight, smooth
highway to nowhere. But some governments still cling to the old
habits of central control. There are governments that still fear and
repress independent thought and creativity, and private enterprise
————
182

— the human qualities that make for a — strong and successful
societies. Even when these nations have vast natural resources,
they do not respect or develop their greatest resources — the talent
and energy of men and women working and living in freedom.
Instead of dwelling on past wrongs and blaming others,
governments in the Middle East need to confront real problems,
and serve the true interests of their nations. The good and capable
people of the Middle East all deserve responsible leadership.
For too long, many people in that region have been victims and
subjects — they deserve to be active citizens.
Governments across the Middle East and North Africa are
beginning to see the need for change. Morocco has a diverse new
parliament; King Mohammed has urged it to extend the rights
to women. Here is how His Majesty explained his reforms to
parliament: “How can society achieve progress while women, who
represent half the nation, see their rights violated and suffer as a
result of injustice, violence, and marginalization, notwithstanding
the dignity and justice granted to them by our glorious religion?”
The King of Morocco is correct: The future of Muslim nations will
be better for all with the full participation of women.
In Bahrain last year, citizens elected their own parliament
for the first time in nearly three decades. Oman has extended the
vote to all adult citizens; Qatar has a new constitution; Yemen
has a multiparty political system; Kuwait has a directly elected
national assembly; and Jordan held historic elections this summer.
Recent surveys in Arab nations reveal broad support for political
pluralism, the rule of law, and free speech. These are the stirrings
of Middle Eastern democracy, and they carry the promise of
greater change to come.
As changes come to the Middle Eastern region, those
with power should ask themselves: Will they be remembered
for resisting reform, or for leading it? In Iran, the demand for
democracy is strong and broad, as we saw last month when
thousands gathered to welcome home Shirin Ebadi, the winner
of the Nobel Peace Prize. The regime in Teheran must heed the
————
183

democratic demands of the Iranian people, or lose its last claim to
legitimacy.
For the Palestinian people, the only path to independence and
dignity and progress is the path of democracy. And the Palestinian
leaders who block and undermine democratic reform, and feed
hatred and encourage violence are not leaders at all. They’re the
main obstacles to peace, and to the success of the Palestinian
people.
The Saudi government is taking first steps toward reform,
including a plan for gradual introduction of elections. By giving
the Saudi people a greater role in their own society, the Saudi
government can demonstrate true leadership in the region.
The great and proud nation of Egypt has shown the way toward
peace in the Middle East, and now should show the way toward
democracy in the Middle East. Champions of democracy in the
region understand that democracy is not perfect, it is not the path to
utopia, but it’s the only path to national success and dignity.
As we watch and encourage reforms in the region, we are
mindful that modernization is not the same as Westernization.
Representative governments in the Middle East will reflect
their own cultures. They will not, and should not, look like us.
Democratic nations may be constitutional monarchies, federal
republics, or parliamentary systems. And working democracies
always need time to develop — as did our own. We’ve taken a
200-year journey toward inclusion and justice — and this makes us
patient and understanding as other nations are at different stages of
this journey.
There are, however, essential principles common to every
successful society, in every culture. Successful societies limit
the power of the state and the power of the military — so that
governments respond to the will of the people, and not the
will of an elite. Successful societies protect freedom with the
consistent and impartial rule of law, instead of selecting applying
— selectively applying the law to punish political opponents.
Successful societies allow room for healthy civic institutions — for
————
184

political parties and labor unions and independent newspapers and
broadcast media. Successful societies guarantee religious liberty
— the right to serve and honor God without fear of persecution.
Successful societies privatize their economies, and secure the rights
of property. They prohibit and punish official corruption, and invest
in the health and education of their people. They recognize the
rights of women. And instead of directing hatred and resentment
against others, successful societies appeal to the hopes of their own
people.
These vital principles are being applies in the nations of
Afghanistan and Iraq. With the steady leadership of President
Karzai, the people of Afghanistan are building a modern and
peaceful government. Next month, 500 delegates will convene a
national assembly in Kabul to approve a new Afghan constitution.
The proposed draft would establish a bicameral parliament, set
national elections next year, and recognize Afghanistan’s Muslim
identity, while protecting the rights of all citizens. Afghanistan
faces continuing economic and security challenges — it will face
those challenges as a free and stable democracy.
In Iraq, the Coalition Provisional Authority and the Iraqi
Governing Council are also working together to build a democracy
— and after three decades of tyranny, this work is not easy. The
former dictator ruled by terror and treachery, and left deeply
ingrained habits of fear and distrust. Remnants of his regime,
joined by foreign terrorists, continue their battle against order and
against civilization. Our coalition is responding to recent attacks
with precision raids, guided by intelligence provided by the Iraqis,
themselves. And we’re working closely with Iraqi citizens as they
prepare a constitution, as they move toward free elections and take
increasing responsibility for their own affairs. As in the defense of
Greece in 1947, and later in the Berlin Airlift, the strength and will
of free peoples are now being tested before a watching world. And
we will meet this test.
Securing democracy in Iraq is the work of many hands.
American and coalition forces are sacrificing for the peace of
————
185

Iraq and for the security of free nations. Aid workers from many
countries are facing danger to help the Iraqi people. The National
Endowment for Democracy is promoting women’s rights, and
training Iraqi journalists, and teaching the skills of political
participation. Iraqis, themselves — police and borders guards and
local officials — are joining in the work and they are sharing in the
sacrifice.
This is a massive and difficult undertaking — it is worth our
effort, it is worth our sacrifice, because we know the stakes. The
failure of Iraqi democracy would embolden terrorists around the
world, increase dangers to the American people, and extinguish
the hopes of millions in the region. Iraqi democracy will succeed
— and that success will send forth the news, from Damascus to
Teheran — that freedom can be the future of every nation. The
establishment of a free Iraq at the heart of the Middle East will be a
watershed event in the global democratic revolution.
Sixty years of Western nations excusing and accommodating
the lack of freedom in the Middle East did nothing to make us
safe — because in the long run, stability cannot be purchased
at the expense of liberty. As long as the Middle East remains a
place where freedom does not flourish, it will remain a place of
stagnation, resentment, and violence ready for export. And with the
spread of weapons that can bring catastrophic harm to our country
and to our friends, it would be reckless to accept the status quo.
Therefore, the United States has adopted a new policy, a
forward strategy of freedom in the Middle East. This strategy
requires the same persistence and energy and idealism we have
shown before. And it will yield the same results. As in Europe, as
in Asia, as in every region of the world, the advance of freedom
leads to peace.
The advance of freedom is the calling of our time; it is the
calling of our country. From the Fourteen Points to the Four
Freedoms, to the Speech at Westminster, America has put our
power at the service of principle. We believe that liberty is the
design of nature; we believe that liberty is the direction of history.
————
186

We believe that human fulfillment and excellence come in the
responsible exercise of liberty. And we believe that freedom —
the freedom we prize — is not for us alone, it is the right and the
capacity of all mankind.
Working for the spread of freedom can be hard. Yet, America
has accomplished hard tasks before. Our nation is strong; we’re
strong of heart. And we’re not alone. Freedom is finding allies in
every country; freedom finds allies in every culture. And as we
meet the terror and violence of the world, we can be certain the
author of freedom is not indifferent to the fate of freedom.
With all the tests and all the challenges of our age, this is,
above all, the age of liberty. Each of you at this Endowment is
fully engaged in the great cause of liberty. And I thank you. May
God bless your work. And may God continue to bless America.


Good morning, thanks for the warm welcome. In a few
moments I will have the honor of signing an historic act of
Congress into law. I’m pleased that all of you are here to witness
the greatest advance in health care coverage for America’s seniors
since the founding of Medicare.
With the Medicare Act of 2003, our government is finally
bringing prescription drug coverage to the seniors of America.
With this law, we’re giving older Americans better choices and
more control over their health care, so they can receive the modern
medical care they deserve. With this law, we are providing more
access to comprehensive exams, disease screenings, and other
preventative care, so that seniors across this land can live better
and healthier lives. With this law, we are creating Health Savings
Accounts so that all Americans can put money away for their
health care tax-free.
Our nation has the best health care system in the world. And
we want our seniors to share in the benefits of that system. Our
nation has made a promise, a solemn promise to America’s seniors.
We have pledged to help our citizens find affordable medical
care in the later years of life. Lyndon Johnson established that
commitment by signing the Medicare Act of 1965. And today, by
reforming and modernizing this vital program, we are honoring the
commitments of Medicare to all our seniors.
The point man in my administration on this issue was
Secretary Tommy Thompson, and he and his team did a fabulous
job of working with the Congress to get this important piece of
legislation passed. Tommy, I want to thank you for your leadership.
This bill passed the Congress because of the strong leadership
————
189

of a handful of members, starting with the Speaker of the House
Denny Hastert. Mr. Speaker — Mr. Speaker was joined by Senator
Bill Frist, the Senate Majority Leader of the Senate, in providing
the leadership necessary to get this bill done. I want to thank you
both.
I appreciate the hard work of the House Majority Leader, Tom
DeLay, in seeing that this bill was passed. I also appreciate the
hard work of the Chairman of the Ways and Means Committee,
Chairman Bill Thomas, for his good work. The Chairman of the
Finance Committee in the Senate, Senator Chuck Grassley, did a
noble job. And he was joined in this task by the Ranking Member
of the Finance Committee, Senator Max Baucus of Montana.
And the entire Senate effort was boosted by the efforts of a
man from Louisiana, Senator John Breaux. And speaking about
Louisiana, Billy Tauzin of the House of Representatives did
great work on this bill. Senator Orrin Hatch from Utah made
a significant contribution. Nancy Johnson, the House member
from Connecticut, did a great job. Mike Bilirakis from Florida
worked hard on this piece of legislation. I want to thank all the
other members of the Congress and the Senate who have joined us.
Thank you all for taking time out of your busy schedules to share
in this historic moment.
I appreciate Tom Scully, the Administrator of the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services, for his good work. The Director
of the CDC, Julie Gerberding, is with us today. Julie, thank you for
coming. The Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Mark
McClellan is here. Jo Anne Barnhart, the Commissioner of the
Social Security Administration, is with us. Thank you for coming,
Jo Anne. Kay James who is the Director of the Office of Personnel
Management, is with us. Thank you for coming, Kay.
A lot of this happened — this bill happened because of
grassroots work. A lot of our fellow citizens took it upon
themselves to agitate for change, to lobby on behalf of what’s right.
We had some governor support around the country — Governor
Craig Benson from New Hampshire is with us today. Governor,
————
190

thank you for coming.
But the groups that speak for the elderly did fantastic work
on this legislation. See, there was a lot of pressure not to get
something done — for the wrong reasons, I might add. But Bill
Novelli, the CEO of AARP, stood strong in representing the
people he was supposed to represent and he worked hard to get
this legislation passed. And, Bill, I want to thank you for your
leadership. You were joined by Jim Parkel, who is the President
of the AARP. Jim, I want to thank you, as well, for doing what was
right, for focusing on the needs of the seniors of our country.
Jim Martin, the President of 60 Plus Association, worked
hard. Charlie Jarvis, the Chairman and CEO of United Seniors
Association, worked hard. Mike Maves, the Executive Vice
President and CEO of the AMA, worked hard on this piece of
legislation. Mary Martin, the Chairman of the Board of The
Seniors Coalition, worked hard. The truth of the matter is, a lot of
good people worked hard to get this important legislation done,
and I thank you for your work.
Medicare is a great achievement of a compassionate
government and it is a basic trust we honor. Medicare has spared
millions of seniors from needless hardship. Each generation
benefits from Medicare. Each generation has a duty to strengthen
Medicare. And this generation is fulfilling our duty.
First and foremost, this new law will provide Medicare
coverage for prescription drugs. Medicare was enacted to provide
seniors with the latest in modern medicine. In 1965, that usually
meant house calls, or operations, or long hospital stays. Today,
modern medicine includes out-patient care, disease screenings, and
prescription drugs.
Medicine has changed, but Medicare has not — until today.
Medicare today will pay for extended hospital stays for ulcer
surgery. That’s at a cost of about $28,000 per patient. Yet Medicare
will not pay for the drugs that eliminate the cause of most ulcers,
drugs that cost about $500 a year. It’s a good thing that Medicare
pays when seniors get sick. Now, you see, we’re taking this a step
————
191

further — Medicare will pay for prescription drugs, so that fewer
seniors will get sick in the first place.
Drug coverage under Medicare will allow seniors to replace
more expensive surgeries and hospitalizations with less expensive
prescription medicine. And even more important, drug coverage
under Medicare will save our seniors from a lot of worry. Some
older Americans spend much of their Social Security checks just
on their medications. Some cut down on the dosage, to make a
bottle of pills last longer. Elderly Americans should not have to
live with those kinds of fears and hard choices. This new law will
ease the burden on seniors and will give them the extra help they
need.
Seniors will start seeing help quickly. During the transition to
the full prescription benefit, seniors will receive a drug discount
card. This Medicare-approved card will deliver savings of 10 to 25
percent off the retail price of most medicines. Low-income seniors
will receive the same savings, plus a $600 credit on their cards to
help them pay for the medications they need.
In about two years, full prescription coverage under Medicare
will begin. In return for a monthly premium of about $35, most
seniors without any prescription drug coverage can now expect
to see their current drug bills cut roughly in half. This new law
will provide 95 percent coverage for out-of-pocket drug spending
that exceeds $3,600 a year. For the first time, we’re giving seniors
peace of mind that they will not have to face unlimited expenses
for their medicine.
The new law offers special help to one-third of older
Americans will low incomes, such as a senior couple with low
savings and an annual income of about $18,000 or less. These
seniors will pay little or no premium for full drug coverage.
Their deductible will be no higher than $50 per year, and their
co-payment on each prescription will be as little as $1. Seniors in
the greatest need will have the greatest help under the modernized
Medicare system.
I visited with seniors around the country and heard many of
————
192

their stories. I’m proud that this legislation will give them practical
and much needed help. Mary Jane Jones from Midlothian,
Virginia, has a modest income. Her drug bills total nearly $500 a
month. Things got so tight for a while she had to use needles twice
or three times for her insulin shots. With this law, Mary Jane won’t
have to go to such extremes. In exchange for a monthly premium
of about $35, Mary Jane Jones would save nearly $2,700 in annual
prescription drug spending.
Hugh Iverson from West Des Moines, Iowa, just got his
Medicare membership. And that’s a good thing, because he hasn’t
had health insurance for more than three years. His drug bills total
at least $400 a month. Within two years, with the $35 a month
coverage, he will be able to cut those bills nearly in half, saving
him about $2,400 a year.
Neil LeGrow from Culpepper, Virginia, takes 15 medications,
costing him at least $700 a month. To afford all those medications,
Neil has to stay working. And thanks to this law, once he is
enrolled in the drug benefit, he will be able to cut back his work
hours and enjoy his retirement more because he’ll have coverage
that saves him about $4,700 a year.
I promised these seniors when I met with them that we would
work hard to give them the help they need. They are all here today.
So I am happy to report to them in person — Mary Jane, Hugh,
and Neil, we are keeping our promise.
In addition to providing coverage for prescription drugs, this
legislation achieves a second great goal. We’re giving our seniors
more health care choices so they can get the coverage and care
that meets their needs. Every senior needs to know if you don’t
want to change your current coverage, you don’t have to change.
You’re the one in charge. If you want to keep your Medicare the
way it is, along with the new prescription benefit, that is your
right. If you want to improve benefits — maybe dental coverage,
or eyeglass coverage, or managed care plans that reduce out-ofpocket costs — you’ll be free to make those choices, as well.
And when seniors have the ability to make choices, health
————
193

care plans within Medicare will have to compete for their business
by offering higher quality service. For the seniors of America, more
choices and more control will mean better health care. These are the
kinds of health care options we give to the members of Congress
and federal employees. They have the ability to pick plans to — that
are right for their own needs. What’s good for members of Congress
is also good for seniors. Our seniors are fully capable of making
health care choices, and this bill allows them to do just that.
A third purpose achieved by this legislation is smarter medicine
within the Medicare system. For years, our seniors have been
denied Medicare coverage — have been denied Medicare coverage
for a basic physical exam. Beginning in 2005, all newly-enrolled
Medicare beneficiaries will be covered for a complete physical.
The Medicare system will now help seniors and their doctors
diagnose health problems early, so they can treat them early and
our seniors can have a better quality life. For example, starting next
year, all people on Medicare will be covered for blood tests that
can diagnose heart diseases. Those at high risk for diabetes will be
covered for blood sugar screening tests. Modern health care is not
complete without prevention — so we are expanding preventive
services under Medicare.
Fourth, the new law will help all Americans pay for out-ofpocket health costs. This legislation will create health savings
accounts, effective January 1, 2004, so Americans can set aside
up to $4,500 every year, tax free, to save for medical expenses.
Depending on your tax bracket, that means you’ll save between
10 to 35 percent on any costs covered by money in your account.
Our laws encourage people to plan for retirement and to save for
education. Now the law will make it easier for Americans to save
for their future health care, as well.
A health savings account is a good deal, and all Americans
should consider it. Every year, the money not spent would stay in
the account and gain interest tax-free, just like an IRA. And people
will have an incentive to live more healthy lifestyles because they
want to see their health savings account grow. These accounts
————
194

will be good for small business owners, and employees. More
businesses can focus on covering workers for major medical
problems, such as hospitalization for an injury or illness. And at
the same time, employees and their families will use these accounts
to cover doctors visits or lab tests or other smaller costs. Some
employers will contribute to employee health accounts. This will
help more American families get the health care they need at the
price they can afford.
The legislation I’m about to sign will set in motion a series of
improvements in the care available to all America’s senior citizens.
And as we begin, it is important for seniors and those approaching
retirement to understand their new benefits.
This coming spring, seniors will receive a letter to explain
the drug discount card. In June, these cards, including the $600
annual drug credit for low-income seniors, will be activated. This
drug card can be used until the end of 2005. In the fall of that year,
seniors will receive an information booklet giving simple guidance
on changes in the program and the new choices they will have.
Then in January of 2006, seniors will have their new coverage,
including permanent coverage for prescription drugs.
These reforms are the act of a vibrant and compassionate
government. We show are concern for the dignity of our seniors
by giving them quality health care. We show our respect for
seniors by giving them more choices and more control over their
decision-making. We’re putting individuals in charge of their health
care decisions. And as we move to modernize and reform other
programs of this government, we will always trust individuals and
their decisions, and put personal choice at the heart of our efforts.
The challenges facing seniors on Medicare were apparent for
many years. And those years passed with much debate and a lot
of politics, and little reform to show for it. And that changed with
the 108th Congress. This year we met our challenge with focus
and perseverance. We confronted problems, instead of passing
them along to future administrations and future Congresses. We
overcame old partisan differences. We kept our promise, and found
————
195

a way to get the job done. This legislation is the achievement of
members in both political parties. And this legislation is a victory
for all of America’s seniors.
Now I’m honored and pleased to sign this historic piece of
legislation: the Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement and
Modernization Act of 2003.

Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, members of Congress,
distinguished guests, and fellow citizens: America this evening is
a nation called to great responsibilities. And we are rising to meet
them.
As we gather tonight, hundreds of thousands of American
servicemen and women are deployed across the world in the war on
terror. By bringing hope to the oppressed, and delivering justice to
the violent, they are making America more secure.
Each day, law enforcement personnel and intelligence officers
are tracking terrorist threats; analysts are examining airline
passenger lists; the men and women of our new Homeland Security
Department are patrolling our coasts and borders. And their
vigilance is protecting America.
Americans are proving once again to be the hardest working
people in the world. The American economy is growing stronger.
The tax relief you passed is working.
Tonight, members of Congress can take pride in the great
works of compassion and reform that skeptics had thought
impossible. You’re raising the standards for our public schools, and
you are giving our senior citizens prescription drug coverage under
Medicare.
We have faced serious challenges together, and now we face a
choice: We can go forward with confidence and resolve, or we can
turn back to the dangerous illusion that terrorists are not plotting
and outlaw regimes are no threat to us. We can press on with
economic growth, and reforms in education and Medicare, or we
can turn back to old policies and old divisions.
We’ve not come all this way — through tragedy, and trial and
————
197

war — only to falter and leave our work unfinished. Americans
are rising to the tasks of history, and they expect the same from us.
In their efforts, their enterprise, and their character, the American
people are showing that the state of our union is confident and
strong.
Our greatest responsibility is the active defense of the American
people. Twenty-eight months have passed since September 11th,
2001 — over two years without an attack on American soil. And
it is tempting to believe that the danger is behind us. That hope is
understandable, comforting — and false. The killing has continued
in Bali, Jakarta, Casablanca, Riyadh, Mombasa, Jerusalem,
Istanbul, and Baghdad. The terrorists continue to plot against
America and the civilized world. And by our will and courage, this
danger will be defeated.
Inside the United States, where the war began, we must
continue to give our homeland security and law enforcement
personnel every tool they need to defend us. And one of those
essential tools is the Patriot Act, which allows federal law
enforcement to better share information, to track terrorists, to
disrupt their cells, and to seize their assets. For years, we have
used similar provisions to catch embezzlers and drug traffickers. If
these methods are good for hunting criminals, they are even more
important for hunting terrorists.
Key provisions of the Patriot Act are set to expire next year.
The terrorist threat will not expire on that schedule. Our law
enforcement needs this vital legislation to protect our citizens. You
need to renew the Patriot Act.
America is on the offensive against the terrorists who started
this war. Last March, Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, a mastermind
of September the 11th, awoke to find himself in the custody of
U.S. and Pakistani authorities. Last August the 11th brought the
capture of the terrorist Hambali, who was a key player in the attack
in Indonesia that killed over 200 people. We’re tracking al Qaeda
around the world, and nearly two-thirds of their known leaders
have now been captured or killed. Thousands of very skilled and
————
198

determined military personnel are on the manhunt, going after the
remaining killers who hide in cities and caves, and one by one, we
will bring these terrorists to justice.
As part of the offensive against terror, we are also confronting
the regimes that harbor and support terrorists, and could supply
them with nuclear, chemical or biological weapons. The United
States and our allies are determined: We refuse to live in the
shadow of this ultimate danger.
The first to see our determination were the Taliban, who made
Afghanistan the primary training base of al Qaeda killers. As of
this month, that country has a new constitution, guaranteeing free
elections and full participation by women. Businesses are opening,
health care centers are being established, and the boys and girls of
Afghanistan are back in school. With the help from the new Afghan
army, our coalition is leading aggressive raids against the surviving
members of the Taliban and al Qaeda. The men and women of
Afghanistan are building a nation that is free and proud and
fighting terror — and America is honored to be their friend.
Since we last met in this chamber, combat forces of the
United States, Great Britain, Australia, Poland and other countries
enforced the demands of the United Nations, ended the rule of
Saddam Hussein, and the people of Iraq are free.
Having broken the Baathist regime, we face a remnant of
violent Saddam supporters. Men who ran away from our troops
in battle are now dispersed and attack from the shadows. These
killers, joined by foreign terrorists, are a serious, continuing danger.
Yet we’re making progress against them. The once all-powerful
ruler of Iraq was found in a hole, and now sits in a prison cell. Of
the top 55 officials of the former regime, we have captured or killed
45. Our forces are on the offensive, leading over 1,600 patrols a
day and conducting an average of 180 raids a week. We are dealing
with these thugs in Iraq, just as surely as we dealt with Saddam
Hussein’s evil regime.
The work of building a new Iraq is hard, and it is right. And
America has always been willing to do what it takes for what is
————
199

right. Last January, Iraq’s only law was the whim of one brutal
man. Today our coalition is working with the Iraqi Governing
Council to draft a basic law, with a bill of rights. We’re working
with Iraqis and the United Nations to prepare for a transition to full
Iraqi sovereignty by the end of June.
As democracy takes hold in Iraq, the enemies of freedom will
do all in their power to spread violence and fear. They are trying to
shake the will of our country and our friends, but the United States
of America will never be intimidated by thugs and assassins. The
killers will fail, and the Iraqi people will live in freedom.
Month by month, Iraqis are assuming more responsibility
for their own security and their own future. And tonight we are
honored to welcome one of Iraq’s most respected leaders: the
current President of the Iraqi Governing Council, Adnan Pachachi.
Sir, America stands with you and the Iraqi people as you build
a free and peaceful nation.
Because of American leadership and resolve, the world is
changing for the better. Last month, the leader of Libya voluntarily
pledged to disclose and dismantle all of his regime’s weapons of
mass destruction programs, including a uranium enrichment project
for nuclear weapons. Colonel Qadhafi correctly judged that his
country would be better off and far more secure without weapons
of mass murder.
Nine months of intense negotiations involving the United
States and Great Britain succeeded with Libya, while 12 years
of diplomacy with Iraq did not. And one reason is clear: For
diplomacy to be effective, words must be credible, and no one can
now doubt the word of America.
Different threats require different strategies. Along with
nations in the region, we’re insisting that North Korea eliminate
its nuclear program. America and the international community
are demanding that Iran meet its commitments and not develop
nuclear weapons. America is committed to keeping the world’s
most dangerous weapons out of the hands of the most dangerous
regimes.
————
200

When I came to this rostrum on September the 20th, 2001, I
brought the police shield of a fallen officer, my reminder of lives
that ended, and a task that does not end. I gave to you and to all
Americans my complete commitment to securing our country and
defeating our enemies. And this pledge, given by one, has been
kept by many.
You in the Congress have provided the resources for our
defense, and cast the difficult votes of war and peace. Our closest
allies have been unwavering. America’s intelligence personnel
and diplomats have been skilled and tireless. And the men and
women of the American military — they have taken the hardest
duty. We’ve seen their skill and their courage in armored charges
and midnight raids, and lonely hours on faithful watch. We have
seen the joy when they return, and felt the sorrow when one is lost.
I’ve had the honor of meeting our servicemen and women at many
posts, from the deck of a carrier in the Pacific to a mess hall in
Baghdad.
Many of our troops are listening tonight. And I want you
and your families to know: America is proud of you. And my
administration, and this Congress, will give you the resources you
need to fight and win the war on terror.
I know that some people question if America is really in a
war at all. They view terrorism more as a crime, a problem to be
solved mainly with law enforcement and indictments. After the
World Trade Center was first attacked in 1993, some of the guilty
were indicted and tried and convicted, and sent to prison. But the
matter was not settled. The terrorists were still training and plotting
in other nations, and drawing up more ambitious plans. After the
chaos and carnage of September the 11th, it is not enough to serve
our enemies with legal papers. The terrorists and their supporters
declared war on the United States, and war is what they got.
Some in this chamber, and in our country, did not support the
liberation of Iraq. Objections to war often come from principled
motives. But let us be candid about the consequences of leaving
Saddam Hussein in power. We’re seeking all the facts. Already,
————
201

the Kay Report identified dozens of weapons of mass destructionrelated program activities and significant amounts of equipment
that Iraq concealed from the United Nations. Had we failed to
act, the dictatator’s weapons of mass destruction programs would
continue to this day. Had we failed to act, Security Council
resolutions on Iraq would have been revealed as empty threats,
weakening the United Nations and encouraging defiance by
dictators around the world. Iraq’s torture chambers would still be
filled with victims, terrified and innocent. The killing fields of Iraq
— where hundreds of thousands of men and women and children
vanished into the sands — would still be known only to the killers.
For all who love freedom and peace, the world without Saddam
Hussein’s regime is a better and safer place.
Some critics have said our duties in Iraq must be
internationalized. This particular criticism is hard to explain to our
partners in Britain, Australia, Japan, South Korea, the Philippines,
Thailand, Italy, Spain, Poland, Denmark, Hungary, Bulgaria,
Ukraine, Romania, the Netherlands, Norway, El Salvador, and
the 17 other countries that have committed troops to Iraq. As we
debate at home, we must never ignore the vital contributions of our
international partners, or dismiss their sacrifices.
From the beginning, America has sought international support
for our operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, and we have gained
much support. There is a difference, however, between leading
a coalition of many nations, and submitting to the objections of
a few. America will never seek a permission slip to defend the
security of our country.
We also hear doubts that democracy is a realistic goal for the
greater Middle East, where freedom is rare. Yet it is mistaken, and
condescending, to assume that whole cultures and great religions
are incompatible with liberty and self-government. I believe
that God has planted in every human heart the desire to live in
freedom. And even when that desire is crushed by tyranny for
decades, it will rise again.
As long as the Middle East remains a place of tyranny and
————
202

despair and anger, it will continue to produce men and movements
that threaten the safety of America and our friends. So America is
pursuing a forward strategy of freedom in the greater Middle East.
We will challenge the enemies of reform, confront the allies of
terror, and expect a higher standard from our friend. To cut through
the barriers of hateful propaganda, the Voice of America and other
broadcast services are expanding their programming in Arabic and
Persian — and soon, a new television service will begin providing
reliable news and information across the region. I will send you
a proposal to double the budget of the National Endowment for
Democracy, and to focus its new work on the development of free
elections, and free markets, free press, and free labor unions in
the Middle East. And above all, we will finish the historic work of
democracy in Afghanistan and Iraq, so those nations can light the
way for others, and help transform a troubled part of the world.
America is a nation with a mission, and that mission comes
from our most basic beliefs. We have no desire to dominate, no
ambitions of empire. Our aim is a democratic peace — a peace
founded upon the dignity and rights of every man and woman.
America acts in this cause with friends and allies at our side, yet
we understand our special calling: This great republic will lead the
cause of freedom.
In the last three years, adversity has also revealed the
fundamental strengths of the American economy. We have come
through recession, and terrorist attack, and corporate scandals,
and the uncertainties of war. And because you acted to stimulate
our economy with tax relief, this economy is strong, and growing
stronger.
You have doubled the child tax credit from $500 to $1,000,
reduced the marriage penalty, begun to phase out the death tax,
reduced taxes on capital gains and stock dividends, cut taxes on
small businesses, and you have lowered taxes for every American
who pays income taxes.
Americans took those dollars and put them to work, driving
this economy forward. The pace of economic growth in the third
————
203

quarter of 2003 was the fastest in nearly 20 years; new home
construction, the highest in almost 20 years; home ownership rates,
the highest ever. Manufacturing activity is increasing. Inflation is
low. Interest rates are low. Exports are growing. Productivity is
high, and jobs are on the rise.
These numbers confirm that the American people are using their
money far better than government would have — and you were
right to return it.
America’s growing economy is also a changing economy. As
technology transforms the way almost every job is done, America
becomes more productive, and workers need new skills. Much of
our job growth will be found in high-skilled fields like health care
and biotechnology. So we must respond by helping more Americans
gain the skills to find good jobs in our new economy.
All skills begin with the basics of reading and math, which are
supposed to be learned in the early grades of our schools. Yet for
too long, for too many children, those skills were never mastered.
By passing the No Child Left Behind Act, you have made the
expectation of literacy the law of our country. We’re providing more
funding for our schools — a 36-percent increase since 2001. We’re
requiring higher standards. We are regularly testing every child on
the fundamentals. We are reporting results to parents, and making
sure they have better options when schools are not performing. We
are making progress toward excellence for every child in America.
But the status quo always has defenders. Some want to
undermine the No Child Left Behind Act by weakening standards
and accountability. Yet the results we require are really a matter
of common sense: We expect third graders to read and do math at
the third grade level — and that’s not asking too much. Testing is
the only way to identify and help students who are falling behind.
This nation will not go back to the days of simply shuffling children
along from grade to grade without them learning the basics. I refuse
to give up on any child — and the No Child Left Behind Act is
opening the door of opportunity to all of America’s children.
At the same time, we must ensure that older students and adults
————
204

can gain the skills they need to find work now. Many of the fastest
growing occupations require strong math and science preparation,
and training beyond the high school level. So tonight, I propose a
series of measures called Jobs for the 21st Century. This program
will provide extra help to middle and high school students who fall
behind in reading and math, expand advanced placement programs
in low-income schools, invite math and science professionals
from the private sector to teach part-time in our high schools. I
propose larger Pell grants for students who prepare for college
with demanding courses in high school. I propose increasing our
support for America’s fine community colleges, so they can — I
do so, so they can train workers for industries that are creating
the most new jobs. By all these actions, we’ll help more and more
Americans to join in the growing prosperity of our country. Job
training is important, and so is job creation.
We must continue to pursue an aggressive, pro-growth
economic agenda. Congress has some unfinished business on the
issue of taxes. The tax reductions you passed are set to expire.
Unless you act, the unfair tax on marriage will go back up. Unless
you act, millions of families will be charged $300 more in federal
taxes for every child. Unless you act, small businesses will pay
higher taxes. Unless you act, the death tax will eventually come
back to life. Unless you act, Americans face a tax increase. What
Congress has given, the Congress should not take away. For the
sake of job growth, the tax cuts you passed should be permanent.
Our agenda for jobs and growth must help small business
owners and employees with relief from needless federal regulation,
and protect them from junk and frivolous lawsuits.
Consumers and businesses need reliable supplies of energy
to make our economy run — so I urge you to pass legislation to
modernize our electricity system, promote conservation, and make
America less dependent on foreign sources of energy.
My administration is promoting free and fair trade to open up
new markets for America’s entrepreneurs and manufacturers and
farmers — to create jobs for American workers. Younger workers
————
205

should have the opportunity to build a nest egg by saving part of
their Social Security taxes in a personal retirement account. We
should make the Social Security system a source of ownership
for the American people. And we should limit the burden of
government on this economy by acting as good stewards of
taxpayers’ dollars.
In two weeks, I will send you a budget that funds the war,
protects the homeland, and meets important domestic needs, while
limiting the growth in discretionary spending to less than 4 percent.
This will require that Congress focus on priorities, cut wasteful
spending, and be wise with the people’s money. By doing so, we
can cut the deficit in half over the next five years.
Tonight, I also ask you to reform our immigration laws so
they reflect our values and benefit our economy. I propose a new
temporary worker program to match willing foreign workers with
willing employers when no Americans can be found to fill the job.
This reform will be good for our economy because employers will
find needed workers in an honest and orderly system. A temporary
worker program will help protect our homeland, allowing Border
Patrol and law enforcement to focus on true threats to our national
security.
I oppose amnesty, because it would encourage further illegal
immigration, and unfairly reward those who break our laws. My
temporary worker program will preserve the citizenship path for
those who respect the law, while bringing millions of hardworking
men and women out from the shadows of American life.
Our nation’s health care system, like our economy, is also in a
time of change. Amazing medical technologies are improving and
saving lives. This dramatic progress has brought its own challenge,
in the rising costs of medical care and health insurance. Members
of Congress, we must work together to help control those costs and
extend the benefits of modern medicine throughout our country.
Meeting these goals requires bipartisan effort, and two months
ago, you showed the way. By strengthening Medicare and adding
a prescription drug benefit, you kept a basic commitment to our
————
206

seniors: You are giving them the modern medicine they deserve.
Starting this year, under the law you passed, seniors can choose
to receive a drug discount card, saving them 10 to 25 percent
off the retail price of most prescription drugs — and millions of
low-income seniors can get an additional $600 to buy medicine.
Beginning next year, seniors will have new coverage for preventive
screenings against diabetes and heart disease, and seniors just
entering Medicare can receive wellness exams.
In January of 2006, seniors can get prescription drug coverage
under Medicare. For a monthly premium of about $35, most
seniors who do not have that coverage today can expect to see their
drug bills cut roughly in half. Under this reform, senior citizens
will be able to keep their Medicare just as it is, or they can choose
a Medicare plan that fits them best — just as you, as members of
Congress, can choose an insurance plan that meets your needs. And
starting this year, millions of Americans will be able to save money
tax-free for their medical expenses in a health savings account.
I signed this measure proudly, and any attempt to limit the
choices of our seniors, or to take away their prescription drug
coverage under Medicare, will meet my veto.
On the critical issue of health care, our goal is to ensure that
Americans can choose and afford private health care coverage that
best fits their individual needs. To make insurance more affordable,
Congress must act to address rapidly rising health care costs.
Small businesses should be able to band together and negotiate for
lower insurance rates, so they can cover more workers with health
insurance. I urge you to pass association health plans. I ask you to
give lower-income Americans a refundable tax credit that would
allow millions to buy their own basic health insurance.
By computerizing health records, we can avoid dangerous
medical mistakes, reduce costs, and improve care. To protect the
doctor-patient relationship, and keep good doctors doing good
work, we must eliminate wasteful and frivolous medical lawsuits.
And tonight I propose that individuals who buy catastrophic health
care coverage, as part of our new health savings accounts, be
————
207

allowed to deduct 100 percent of the premiums from their taxes.
A government-run health care system is the wrong prescription.
By keeping costs under control, expanding access, and helping
more Americans afford coverage, we will preserve the system of
private medicine that makes America’s health care the best in the
world.
We are living in a time of great change — in our world, in
our economy, in science and medicine. Yet some things endure
— courage and compassion, reverence and integrity, respect for
differences of faith and race. The values we try to live by never
change. And they are instilled in us by fundamental institutions,
such as families and schools and religious congregations. These
institutions, these unseen pillars of civilization, must remain strong
in America, and we will defend them. We must stand with our
families to help them raise healthy, responsible children. When it
comes to helping children make right choices, there is work for all
of us to do.
One of the worst decisions our children can make is to gamble
their lives and futures on drugs. Our government is helping parents
confront this problem with aggressive education, treatment, and law
enforcement. Drug use in high school has declined by 11 percent
over the last two years. Four hundred thousand fewer young people
are using illegal drugs than in the year 2001. In my budget, I
proposed new funding to continue our aggressive, communitybased strategy to reduce demand for illegal drugs. Drug testing
in our schools has proven to be an effective part of this effort. So
tonight I proposed an additional $23 million for schools that want
to use drug testing as a tool to save children’s lives. The aim here is
not to punish children, but to send them this message: We love you,
and we don’t want to lose you.
To help children make right choices, they need good examples.
Athletics play such an important role in our society, but,
unfortunately, some in professional sports are not setting much of
an example. The use of performance-enhancing drugs like steroids
in baseball, football, and other sports is dangerous, and it sends
————
208

the wrong message — that there are shortcuts to accomplishment,
and that performance is more important than character. So tonight I
call on team owners, union representatives, coaches, and players to
take the lead, to send the right signal, to get tough, and to get rid of
steroids now.
To encourage right choices, we must be willing to confront
the dangers young people face — even when they’re difficult to
talk about. Each year, about 3 million teenagers contract sexuallytransmitted diseases that can harm them, or kill them, or prevent
them from ever becoming parents. In my budget, I propose a
grassroots campaign to help inform families about these medical
risks. We will double federal funding for abstinence programs, so
schools can teach this fact of life: Abstinence for young people is
the only certain way to avoid sexually-transmitted diseases.
Decisions children now make can affect their health and
character for the rest of their lives. All of us — parents and schools
and government — must work together to counter the negative
influence of the culture, and to send the right messages to our
children.
A strong America must also value the institution of marriage.
I believe we should respect individuals as we take a principled
stand for one of the most fundamental, enduring institutions of our
civilization. Congress has already taken a stand on this issue by
passing the Defense of Marriage Act, signed in 1996 by President
Clinton. That statute protects marriage under federal law as a union
of a man and a woman, and declares that one state may not redefine
marriage for other states.
Activist judges, however, have begun redefining marriage
by court order, without regard for the will of the people and their
elected representatives. On an issue of such great consequence,
the people’s voice must be heard. If judges insist on forcing their
arbitrary will upon the people, the only alternative left to the people
would be the constitutional process. Our nation must defend the
sanctity of marriage.
The outcome of this debate is important — and so is the way
————
209

we conduct it. The same moral tradition that defines marriage also
teaches that each individual has dignity and value in God’s sight.
It’s also important to strengthen our communities by unleashing
the compassion of America’s religious institutions. Religious
charities of every creed are doing some of the most vital work in
our country — mentoring children, feeding the hungry, taking the
hand of the lonely. Yet government has often denied social service
grants and contracts to these groups, just because they have a cross
or a Star of David or a crescent on the wall. By executive order,
I have opened billions of dollars in grant money to competition
that includes faith-based charities. Tonight I ask you to codify
this into law, so people of faith can know that the law will never
discriminate against them again.
In the past, we’ve worked together to bring mentors to
children of prisoners, and provide treatment for the addicted, and
help for the homeless. Tonight I ask you to consider another group
of Americans in need of help. This year, some 600,000 inmates
will be released from prison back into society. We know from long
experience that if they can’t find work, or a home, or help, they are
much more likely to commit crime and return to prison. So tonight,
I propose a four-year, $300 million prisoner re-entry initiative to
expand job training and placement services, to provide transitional
housing, and to help newly released prisoners get mentoring,
including from faith-based groups. America is the land of second
chance, and when the gates of the prison open, the path ahead
should lead to a better life.
For all Americans, the last three years have brought tests we
did not ask for, and achievements shared by all. By our actions, we
have shown what kind of nation we are. In grief, we have found
the grace to go on. In challenge, we rediscovered the courage and
daring of a free people. In victory, we have shown the noble aims
and good heart of America. And having come this far, we sense
that we live in a time set apart.
I’ve been witness to the character of the people of America,
who have shown calm in times of danger, compassion for one
————
210

another, and toughness for the long haul. All of us have been
partners in a great enterprise. And even some of the youngest
understand that we are living in historic times. Last month a girl in
Lincoln, Rhode Island, sent me a letter. It began, “Dear George W.
Bush. If there’s anything you know, I, Ashley Pearson, age 10, can
do to help anyone, please send me a letter and tell me what I can do
to save our country.” She added this P.S.: “If you can send a letter
to the troops, please put, ‘Ashley Pearson believes in you.’”
Tonight, Ashley, your message to our troops has just been
conveyed. And, yes, you have some duties yourself. Study hard in
school, listen to your mom or dad, help someone in need, and when
you and your friends see a man or woman in uniform, say, “thank
you.” And, Ashley, while you do your part, all of us here in this
great chamber will do our best to keep you and the rest of America
safe and free.
My fellow citizens, we now move forward, with confidence
and faith. Our nation is strong and steadfast. The cause we serve
is right, because it is the cause of all mankind. The momentum
of freedom in our world is unmistakable — and it is not carried
forward by our power alone. We can trust in that greater power who
guides the unfolding of the years. And in all that is to come, we can
know that His purposes are just and true.
May God continue to bless America.


Thanks for the warm welcome. I appreciate so very much the
invitation to come today. I’m really glad to be back in the great city
of Cleveland, Ohio. It’s good to be in a room full of accomplished
women. As the husband of Laura and the son of Barbara, I feel
right at home.
I enjoy being in the company of entrepreneurs, risk-takers,
dreamers and doers. You all share a lot of common experiences.
You’ve met challenges of starting a business. And that’s hard. It
required more time than you had in a day, more money than you
kept in your bank, and more energy than you thought you had. But
you chose an interesting life — you chose to lead. You chose to
follow your dreams. And I appreciate your spirit. You’re making
the country a better place by working as hard as you do.
As the Governor said, nearly half of all small businesses are
owned by women. That’s powerful. That’s a beautiful statement.
Firms owned by women are being started at more than twice the
national rate. The entrepreneurial spirit is alive and well.
This is a land of great wealth, and it’s a land of great
opportunity, and you’re seizing the opportunity. Through the hard
work of our people, the innovation of our businesses, and the
good policies now in place, we have put a recession behind us.
Thanks in large part to your hard work, our economy is expanding,
productivity is strong, unemployment has been falling, incomes
are rising — and we’re going to stay on this path of growth and
prosperity in this country. Our economy has challenges, and
we know how to meet them. We’ll continue making the finest
products, and selling those products not only here at home, but
across the world. We’ll make sure that American workers have the
————
213

education and the skills to succeed in the jobs of the future. And
we’ll remain the leading economy in the world, because America
will remain the best place to do business in the world.
I want to thank Jennette Bradley, the Lt. Governor, for her
hospitality. And I want to thank the other officials from the state
of Ohio who are with us. I appreciate Elaine Chao, a member of
my Cabinet, for joining us today. Elaine is doing a great job for
the United States. Es un placer to be here with Hector Barreto, the
head of the SBA.
I traveled today with Steve LaTourette, the Congressman from
this area. Steve, I’m honored you’re here. He’s a pro-growth guy.
He knows the role of government is not to try to create wealth, but
to create an environment in which the entrepreneurial spirit can
flourish. I appreciate you being here. He’s a great Congressman
from this part of the world.
I appreciate the sponsors. Thanks for putting up with me and
the entourage. Most of all, thank you for being here.
Today when I landed at the airport, I met Judi Firestone. Some
of you may know Judi. She’s owned her own computer business
since 1986. She’s an entrepreneur, she’s a visionary. She works
hard. As well, she is the Northeast Ohio chairman for the “Race
For The Cure,” Komen Foundation “Race For The Cure.” She is a
breast cancer survivor.
The reason I bring her up is the true strength of America is the
hearts and souls of our citizens. The true strength of this country
is the fact there are people like Judi Firestone who are willing to
volunteer their time to make the community in which she lives a
better place. It’s really the strength, isn’t it? I mean, the truth of the
matter is we can change this country one heart and one soul at a
time when citizens like Judi take time out of her life, her busy life,
to help somebody who hurts.
And so the reason I herald Judi Firestone is to really talk
about the strength of the country. I know many of you here heard
the call to love a neighbor like you’d like to be loved yourself.
I want to thank you for what you do to make your community
————
214

a loving place. I want to thank you for what you do to heal the
souls that hurt. I want to thank you for what you do to be a part of
the incredibly important fabric of America, that it saves lives not
because of government, but because people are volunteering their
time. And if you’re not volunteering, please do so. The country
needs you. But, Judi, thanks for coming.
This economy of ours has faced challenges over the last three
years. Think back about what we have been through. Not long
before I took office in January of 2001, I invited business leaders
from around our country to come to Austin. They told me that
factories and workers were seeing the first signs of recession.
That’s what they said. They said that the economy was troubled,
that things weren’t feeling too good. And they were right. In fact,
the manufacturing sector had started losing jobs in August of
2000. By January of 2001, orders for equipment and software were
falling, the stock market had been declining for several months.
And as we started to come out of the recession, and the
economy, because of the entrepreneurial spirit and the fact we got
great workers, started to recover, the enemy hit us on September
the 11th, 2001. It was a day of terrible loss, deep mourning. It was
also a serious blow to our economy. The attacks closed the New
York Stock Exchange for nearly a week. Remember back to what it
was like after September the 11th — the U.S. airspace was entirely
closed for the first time. In the three months after September the
11th, the economy lost nearly one million jobs.
The enemy hurt us. But we’re plenty tough and determined
as a nation. And as a result of the American people’s resolution
and determination, we began to recover. And then we learned
about fraud and wrongdoing in corporate America. And that
hurt our economy, as well. There were scandals that were in
the years in making, shook the energy industry; it affected the
telecommunications industry; it hurt the accounting profession, and
other key sectors of our economy. A lot of innocent workers and
investors lost their jobs and their savings.
Those scandals hurt. But we acted, and we passed the strongest
————
215

corporate reforms since Franklin Roosevelt held the office that
I’m honored to hold. Federal prosecutors are holding corporate
executives to account. We have made it clear, we will not tolerate
dishonesty in the boardrooms of America.
This economy of ours had been through recession, had been
through emergency, had been through corporate scandals, and
then I made the necessary decision to deal with Saddam Hussein.
September the 11th taught a lesson I will never forget, and our
country must never forget. America must confront threats before
they fully materialize. That’s the lesson of that fateful day.
In Iraq, this administration looked at the intelligence and
we saw a threat to the American people. The Congress looked at
the same intelligence, and they saw a threat. The United Nations
Security Council looked at the intelligence and it saw a threat. And
then the United Nations Security Council, in 2002, gave Saddam
Hussein a final chance to comply with U.N. resolutions and
disarm. We all saw a threat and we put out, through resolutions,
the demand that he disclose and disarm. And once again, he chose
defiance. He made the choice. I had a choice, as well: either to
trust the word of a madman, or to defend the American people.
Faced with that choice, I will defend America every time.
And therefore, in 2002 and early 2003, the television screens
across America had banners saying, “March to war” — and, as
business leaders, you understand that’s not very conducive to
investing capital. Marching to war is not a positive thought. But
we overcame that challenge. Thanks to hardworking people and
leaders, entrepreneurs, we overcame that challenge. And now
we’re marching to peace.
This week, the Iraqi Governing Council approved the new
fundamental law, which will be the basis for a free constitutional
democracy in the heart of the Middle East. Because we acted,
because we did the right thing, the world is becoming more
peaceful, and America is more secure.
My point is this: We faced challenge after challenge during
the past three years, and we’re overcoming them all. Inflation is
————
216

low; interest rates are low; manufacturing activity is up; home
ownership is at an all-time high. The unemployment rate today is
lower than the average rate in the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s. Thanks
to our productive workers, thanks to business leaders such as
yourself, the United States of America is the fastest-growing major
industrialized economy in the world.
One of the main reasons the recession was one of the shortest
in modern history is because we acted. The tax relief I signed left
money in the pockets of families and job creators at just the right
time. We cut the taxes on our families; we lowered tax rates on
everybody who paid taxes. We didn’t play the old political game of
winners and losers in the tax code. We increased the child credit,
and we reduced the marriage penalty. This helped to lift after-tax
incomes in America by 8.4 percent since 2001 and the spending
and investing of Americans is driving this economy forward. That’s
what’s happening.
Most of the new jobs in America are created by small
businesses. I understand that. And so that is why we focused a
lot of our tax relief on small businesses. The majority of small
businesses are either sole proprietorships or sub-chapter S
corporations, which means many of you pay business taxes at
the individual rates. And so, therefore, when you lower rates on
individuals, you lower rates on small businesses. You allow small
business owners to keep more of their own money to invest, and
therefore, create more jobs.
As well, to encourage investment, we increased the annual
deduction for equipment purchases by small businesses, from
$25,000 to $100,000. You see, I understand you can’t have a
healthy economy without a healthy small business sector — and
the tax relief we passed is reinvigorating small businesses all across
this country.
We did something else that will help the entrepreneurial spirit
in this country. We’re phasing out the death tax. Small business
owners and ranchers and farmers shouldn’t have their assets taxed
twice. The death tax is unfair. You ought to be able to pass your
————
217

assets on to whoever you want.
Pro-growth policies are working. They’re helping this
economy — the economic recovery to turn into lasting prosperity.
That’s what I want, and that’s what’s happening. Yet, the job report
last week shows that while the economy is dynamic and growing,
it’s experiencing some fundamental change. Productivity has
grown faster over the last two years than at any time in more than
50 years, in part because technology is changing the way we do
things. You know what I’m talking about. You’re more productive
in your companies.
In some fields, one person can do the work that used to be
done by many. That’s what being more productive means. At
one semiconductor plant in New Mexico, new technology is
allowing the same number of workers to produce 20 times as many
computer chips as they used to.
Higher productivity is a good thing. It’s good for our workers,
it is good for our economy. If you’re more productive, you’re
better able to compete and survive and expand and grow. People
think — when they think about productivity, you think of it this
way: Operating heavy equipment every day is hard work, but
operating a shovel every day is harder work. I don’t think many
people here want to trade in your laptop for one of those old huntand-peck typewriters.
Advances in productivity lead to higher wages — that is a
fact. The more productive a worker becomes, the better wages that
person will receive. A more productive society means lower prices
for consumers. A more productive society is one that generates
greater national wealth. And small businesses are leading the way
in this productivity revolution. And for that, I’m grateful.
Higher productivity also presents us a challenge, and here’s the
challenge: Many companies fill new orders and expand operations
without needing to hire new workers. Because we’re a productive
work force, the economy can expand, and in some cases, they don’t
need to add additional workers to meet that expansion, to meet the
additional demand. Manufacturing output, for instance, increased
————
218

sixfold between 1950 and 2000 — a sixfold increase. Yet, because
of high productivity, all this manufacturing is done by about the
same number of workers. And because of the new technologies
throughout the economy, another challenge is the fact we’ve
got to make sure people have got the skills necessary to become
productive workers.
In Ohio, you know firsthand the effects of economic change.
Manufacturers are more productive, so they aren’t creating as many
jobs as they used to. Ohio’s unemployment rate is higher than the
national average; manufacturing communities like Youngstown and
Cleveland have been hit especially hard. I understand that. I know
there are workers here concerned about their jobs going overseas.
I share that concern. I know they’re wondering whether they’ll
ever be able to find new skills necessary to fill the new jobs of the
21st century. I understand that. There are those with good jobs who
worry about their health care and their retirement benefits. There
are a lot of moms and dads who wonder whether or not their child
will be able to find a job in the community in which they were
raised. There are legitimate concerns amongst people here in Ohio
and elsewhere around the country.
And one reason why there’s concern is because, as the
economists say, this is a time of transition, it’s a time of change.
And if you’re one going through transition, it’s not an easy
experience. But then we have a responsibility to help. We have a
responsibility to help with more than just unemployment insurance.
We have a responsibility in government to create an environment
that increases more jobs and helps people find the skills to fill those
jobs. That’s a responsibility that we must do in government.
Some politicians in Washington see this new challenge, and
yet they want to respond in old ways. Their agenda is to increase
federal taxes, to build a wall around this country and to isolate
America from the rest of the world. They never get around to
explaining how higher taxes would help create a single job in
America — except maybe at the IRS. They don’t explain how
closing off markets, closing off markets abroad would help the
————
219

millions of Americans who produce goods for export, or work for
foreign companies right here in the United States.
That old policy of tax-and-spend is the enemy of job creation.
The old policy of economic isolationism is a recipe for economic
disaster. America has moved beyond that tired, defeatist mind-set,
and we’re not going back. There’s a better way, and that’s what I
want to talk about today. To expand the creation of new jobs, and
to see our workers through our transition, government must meet
basic responsibilities.
First, instead of building barriers to trade, we must break
down those barriers so that good products, American products,
are welcomed and sold on every continent. Look at it this way:
America has got 5 percent of the world’s population. That means
95 percent of potential customers are in other countries. We
cannot expect to sell our goods and services, and create jobs, if
America and our partners, trading partners, start raising barriers
and closing off markets.
Millions of American jobs are supported by exports. That’s
a fact. One in five factory jobs in this country directly depends
on trade. The surest way to threaten those jobs is a policy of
economic isolation. The surest way to add more jobs is a confident
policy, a confident economic policy that trades with the world.
The economic isolationists have a pessimistic outlook; they
don’t show much faith in the American worker or the American
entrepreneur. They don’t think we can compete. But here in Ohio,
you’re proving them wrong. People all over the world are buying
products from Ohio — cars and tires, and batteries and jet engines,
and ball bearings and electronics, and crops from your farms.
Since 1996, under NAFTA, Ohio’s exports to Mexico have tripled,
and last year came to more than $2 billion — $2 billion of exports
means it’s more likely somebody will have a job in the state of
Ohio. Since the end of 2000, Ohio’s exports have increased more
than any state in the country. And why is that? Because this state
has got great entrepreneurs who are making high-quality products
that the world wants to buy. And another reason why is because
————
220

you’ve got great workers, who, if given a level playing field, can
out-produce any worker, anywhere on the Earth.
Foreign companies recognize the quality of American workers,
and that is one of the reasons why so many have chosen to locate
plants in our country. More than 900 foreign facilities employ
people here in the state of Ohio — including major companies
like Honda. Ten percent of Honda’s international work force lives
in this state. About 16,000 Ohioans work for Honda, with good,
high-paying jobs. That’s a lot of your fellow citizens employed by
a company that has chosen to do business in America. And that’s
not counting the people who work at 165 different Ohio companies
that supply Honda with parts and material.
When politicians in Washington attack trade for political
reasons, they don’t mention these workers, or the 6.4 million other
Americans who draw their paychecks from foreign companies.
Economic isolationism would lead to retaliation from abroad,
and put many of those jobs at risk. Those who play on fear and
criticize trade are not serving the interests of our workers. Across
America — from Marysville, Ohio, to Seattle, Washington —
workers are better off — better off — because this country is an
optimistic, successful trading nation.
My administration is committed to creating the jobs that
trade brings. It’s a commitment of my administration. Remember
this: Presidents of both parties since World War II have made the
decision to open up our markets, for the good of American workers
and for the good of American consumers. If we’re opening up our
markets, it makes sense to get others to open up theirs. And so
we’re dedicated to making sure that other nations treat us fairly.
That’s why I pressed for free trade agreements with Singapore and
Chile. We want them to open up their markets to America’s goods
and services. We’ve recently completed negotiations with Morocco
and Central America.
I just completed a negotiation with Australia. I want you to
understand this important aspect of the trade agreement. Almost
all manufacturing exports to that country will be duty-free
————
221

immediately. That means this could help America’s manufacturers
sell another $2 billion worth of goods to Australia every year. If
we’re going to let people sell here, we ought to be encouraging
them to let — open up their markets, as well. It’s good for jobs,
and it’s good for America.
I want the world to “buy America.” The best products are those
— Listen: The best product on any shelf anywhere in the world
says, “Made in the USA.”
To create more jobs, government must meet a second basic
responsibility. If we want to continue to out-perform the world,
if we want to be able to compete, America must remain the best
place in the world to do business. If we want to be competitive
with other places, we’ve got to be a good place for people to invest
capital. We’ve got to make sure that people who invest capital are
not penalized by lousy government policy. Tax cuts were vital to
creating the environment for growth and innovation, and there are
more steps that need to be done.
There needs to be fewer regulations on business owners in
America. I bet you spend a lot of time filling out paperwork. I
bet not much of your paperwork is ever read. The government
needs to let you focus on your business, on developing goods and
services. It needs to let you focus on hiring people, rather than
spending hours filling out paperwork. In order for us to keep jobs
here at home and expand the job base, we need better regulatory
policy at the federal, state, and local level.
In order to make sure that we’re able to create jobs here at
home, and to prevent jobs from going overseas, this country must
have tort reform. Frivolous lawsuits, or the threat of a frivolous
lawsuit, create an environment that is not conducive to job creation
and job expansion. There’s a role at the federal level for tort
reform. The trial lawyers are tough up there, though. Members of
the Senate need to hear from you. The House has passed good tort
legislation, but the Senate has got to hear from you. Tort reform
will help make it easier to keep jobs here at home.
We need to do something about the high cost of health care, as
————
222

well. I’m a strong proponent of association health plans to allow
small business to pool risk so you can better afford health care
plans for your employees. We’ve introduced a new concept called
health savings accounts, which will make a big difference for small
business owners and employees, as well. And the market has taken
hold. We ought to — listen, frivolous lawsuits are running up the
cost of health care in America. Frivolous lawsuits against docs and
hospitals are making it harder for you to be able to afford health
care. We need medical liability reform at the federal level now.
We’re interested in making sure our jobs don’t go overseas,
and that there’s jobs available for citizens all across our country.
We need affordable and reliable supplies of energy. Here in
Ohio, you know what I’m talking about. You’ve experienced the
disruption and high cost when factories and cities lose power. It’s
time for our nation to modernize the electricity systems. We need
to promote clean coal technology so we’ve got abundant supplies
of energy. We need to explore for more natural gas. We need to
promote conservation. There’s a lot of things we need to do. One
thing is for certain: In order to expand our job base, we need to
become less dependent on foreign sources of energy.
Finally, to make sure this economy grows, to make sure the
entrepreneurial spirit is strong, we must have certainty in the
tax code. It’s important for elected officials to understand that if
you’re a business leader, if you’re the CEO of a corporation, and
you’re uncertain about your taxes from year to year, because of
— because the tax policy is haphazard, it’s hard for you to plan.
It’s hard for you to think ahead. It’s hard for you to be confident in
your investment strategy.
Part of the issues we face here in the future of this country
is the fact that the tax relief we passed is going to expire. The
marriage penalty will go back up. By the way, that doesn’t make
any sense to have a marriage penalty in the tax code when you’re
trying to encourage marriage in the country. The child credit
will go back down if Congress doesn’t act. The death tax will
eventually come back to life. Imagine what it’s going to be like
————
223

in 2011, when it’s supposed to come back to life. There’s going to
be a lot of people maybe trying to die a little earlier to avoid the
— It’s unbelievable when you think about it. Think about public
policy that says: Your taxes are going to be down this year, but not.
We may have increased expensing allowances, or not. Uncertainty
in the tax code makes it hard for the job base to continue to expand.
For the sake of job creation, Congress needs to make tax relief
permanent.
The third basic responsibility is to make sure American
workers are prepared for successful careers in the new economy.
Some sectors are producing fewer jobs, but in other areas, jobs
are growing. They’re multiplying. There’s a lot of opportunity in
a changing economy. Here in Ohio, there’s a shortage of nurses
and pharmacists and other skilled professionals. And so any viable
economic strategy, pro-growth strategy, must be to help people
find new skills, to gain new skills, to be able to fill the new jobs of
the 21st century. If you’re in a period of transition, you must help
people make that transition.
All skills start with education. I’m a strong proponent of the
legislation we passed in Washington called the No Child Left
Behind Act. This is a good piece of legislation which is challenging
the soft bigotry of low expectations. We’ve raised the bar. See, we
believe every child can learn to read and write and add and subtract.
That’s what we believe. And therefore, we expect every child to
achieve those skills. And therefore, we’re expecting, in return for
federal money, the school districts to measure, because if you don’t
measure, how do you know. We’ve just got to stop this practice
of shuffling kids through the school as if they don’t matter. What
matters is every child gets a basic education. And if you can’t read,
you’re not going to be able to take advantage of the new jobs of
the 21st century. And that’s why — that’s why we’re focused on
secondary schools, and that’s why we’ve got plans to help high
school students who’ve fallen behind in reading and math to gain
the skills necessary to be able to work in this new economy.
We’ve got programs to help workers who’ve been displaced
————
224

by the effects of trade, by giving them assistance in job training
and health care and relocation. I proposed what’s called personal
reemployment accounts for people who need extra help so they
can pay for child care and transportation and other costs of finding
work. In other words, we’re trying to help people.
But we’ve got a plan, as well — it’s an important plan that’s
going to make a big difference, and that is to help the community
colleges train workers for jobs which actually exist. Community
colleges need to listen to the business community and the
community in which they live. They need to ask the question,
what do we need to do to train workers? What are you looking for?
What kind of skill set is necessary for you to hire this person? They
need to be flexible. The curriculums must be willing to change.
The community college system has got a fantastic opportunity to
make sure workers gain the skills necessary to become employable
in this changing economy.
I was in Toledo recently and talked with a guy named
Mike Potter. He lost a manufacturing job. He went back to the
community college to get retrained. He got help. The government
paid. And he got retrained and he found a new job because he was
willing to go back to school, and the community college listened to
the employers in the community in which he lived.
I was in Northern Virginia, and went to a community college
system. I met Connie Mitchell. She heard there was jobs available
in the health industry. And by the way, there’s a lot of jobs being
created in the health industry. And so she went to the community
college, and they gave her the skills necessary to become a nurse.
And now she’s employed.
In Mesa, Arizona, I met a Stacey Leedom, who’s a single mom
— which, by the way, is the hardest job in America, being a single
mom. She was a graphic artist. She had worked for a company,
I think, for 12 or 13 years. She got help to go back to Mesa
Community College. She learned a new skill in the computer
industry. And in her first year of a new job, she made more than
she did after 12 years as a graphic artist.
————
225

You see, if you become a more productive citizen, you’ll
make more money. Better productivity, better skills means higher
pay. And our country must focus our education system on helping
workers learn the new skills of the 21st century so we can increase
the job base of this country.
You know, it wasn’t all that long ago that some people said that
America was not up to global competition. I don’t know if you
remember back in the ‘70s and ‘80s — that’s what we heard,
though, wasn’t it — that we couldn’t compete with the Japanese,
that they were too good at being automobile makers, that foreign
companies would soon overtake our own, that we just weren’t up to
it. That’s what a lot of people said in that period. We were told that
American companies weren’t flexible enough; American workers
were not disciplined enough; and American products weren’t good
enough.
Well, the pessimists were wrong. American companies remade
themselves to beat the competition. Great ideas for improvement
came from our work force, workers who are on the line. And the
leaders of those companies listened. The entrepreneurial spirit
was strong in America, and it was the American entrepreneur
that invented new technologies, technologies that have made this
country the most productive in the world. Our economy performed
like never before, and today, no one doubts what nation’s economy
leads this world.
Our nation in 2004 is vibrant. As opposed to retreating like the
pessimists thought, we’re selling computer chips to Japan. We’re
producing BMWs in Greer, South Carolina, for export to Germany.
We’re even exporting California wine to France.
There are people who doubt our ability to compete. There are
economic isolationists who surrender and wall us off. It’s bad for
the country, bad for consumers. It’s bad for workers. We’ll prove
the pessimists wrong again. We’ll continue to open up untapped
markets for American workers and businesses. We’ll keep this
government on the side of growth and job creation, so American
businesses can compete and prosper. We’ll focus on job training
————
226

and education, so Americans can improve their skills and improve
their lives. We’ll get the policies right, and the American people
will do the rest. You will show, once again, that this nation has
the energy and the confidence and the creativity to meet every
challenge.
I want to thank you for your leadership. I want to thank you
for your spirit. I want to thank you for working hard to realize the
American Dream and own your own business. I want to thank you
for employing people. I want to thank you for the faith of your
country.
May God bless you, and may God continue to bless America.

Thank you all very much. Thanks for coming. I appreciate
it. Go ahead and be seated. Thanks for coming. Todd, thanks for
having us. That story he told reminds me of the time when I had
just got elected governor of Texas, and a friend of mine said, why
don’t you call old Bascom Bentley on the phone? He’s an East
Texas guy. And he said, why don’t you call Bascom Bentley on
the phone and just wish him the best. So I picked up the phone and
dialed old Judge Bentley. He’s one of these East Texas judges —
you probably know the kind I’m talking about here in Arkansas. I
said, “Judge, this is George W. Bush calling.” He said, “Come on,
Cliff, quit pulling my leg.”
So, Todd, I understand how those phone calls can go. But we
are serious about coming here because Butterfield Junior High is a
place of academic achievement. That’s why I’m here. It’s a place
— I’m here to congratulate this school and to hold you up as an
example to the country. You’re raising the bar. You see, this is a
school that expects the best for every student. You’re reaching for
high standards, and more importantly, you’re making progress
toward meeting those standards. You’re doing your job.
I know the school year ends on May 27th. And I bet some of
the students are kind of looking forward to that date. As a matter
of fact, I remember the feeling, myself. But summer vacation has
got to feel better for you after a year of accomplishment. And this
past year, students at Butterfield have accomplished a lot.
Not only am I here to hold up the school and talk about setting
high standards and making sure people achieve those standards,
I’m here also to thank the teachers and the staff members and the
parents, who believe in the potential of every young person, and
are willing to work hard to make sure every young person achieves
————
229

that potential.
Not only do we want to thank Todd for being a principal; it
turns out that really good schools have got really good principals,
people that are smart and capable and who believe the best. But
really good principals also have got hardworking staffs, and I know
how hard it is to welcome the President. Take a look at those light
fixtures — I don’t — I’m not sure if that’s a permanent part of the
gymnasium. But for all those who put on this event and put up with
my entourage, I thank you for letting me come by.
I appreciate your Governor showing up. He’s a good friend of
mine. He’s an excellent person — Mike Huckabee is with us today.
In case you don’t recognize him, I’m proud of Mike. He said, look,
I’m going to set an example by taking care of my own body before
I ask others to do the same. He’s exercising and he’s eating smart,
and his health is a lot better for it.
I appreciate Lt. Governor Win Rockefeller joining us, as well.
Thank you, Governor. I’m proud to be able to work with a really
fine member of Congress from this district, in John Boozman.
Where are you, John? Yes, there he is. I know Cathy and Kristen
and Lauren are here, as well — his wife Cathy, and two daughters.
I’m glad you all are here. The only problem I’ve got with Boozman
is he keeps talking about the Arkansas-Texas game. I know it, I
shouldn’t have brought it up.
I appreciate Dr. Merle Dickerson, who is the Superintendent
of the Van Buren School District. Merle, thank you for your
hospitality; thank you for your leadership. I appreciate so very
much — I know the importance of a good school superintendent.
See, when it came time to name the Secretary of Education, I
picked a superintendent in Rod Paige. He was the superintendent
of the Houston Independent School District. I saw him in action
in implementing policies that raise standards and encourage
the best for every student. So I know the importance of a good
superintendent. And I appreciate you, Merle.
Ray Simon is with us today. Where are you, Ray? Oh, there
you go. Blending in nicely. Ray is the Assistant Secretary for
————
230

Elementary and Secondary Education. He’s the former director of
the Arkansas Department of Education. He works for Rod Paige. In
other words, what I’m telling you is we pick good people to staff
the federal offices, people who understand the principles of the No
Child Left Behind Act, which I’m about to describe to you.
I appreciate Ken James, the Director of the Arkansas
Department of Education. Thank you for coming, Ken. Mayor
John Riggs is with us. Where are you, Mr. Mayor? Mr. Mayor, I’m
glad you’re here. People give me advice all the time, so sometimes
I like to give people advice. And, Mr. Mayor, my only advice to
you is, fill the potholes.
I want to thank the Junior High Trailblazers for hosting me
today. I appreciate the students letting us come on your campus. I
hope you don’t mind having the classes cancelled for a while today.
I also met Alyse Eady today. Where are you, Alyse? There she
is. Alyse, thanks for coming. Let me tell you about Alyse. She’s
a sophomore at Southside High, and she is a tutor at the Boys
and Girls Club. The reason I bring up Alyse, is because I want to
remind everybody here what the strength of this country is.
Now, a lot of people talk about the military being the strength
of this country, and I see we’ve got some fine troops here. Thanks
for coming. And the military is an important part of our strength.
As a matter of fact, we’re counting on the military in theaters
overseas to make us more secure. We’re counting on brave men
and women to help spread freedom in parts of the world that
desperately need freedom. We’re counting on our military to make
America more secure by spreading peace.
And that’s what you’re seeing right now. On your TV screens,
you’re seeing tough work, because there are people who can’t stand
the thought of free societies springing up in the middle — in the
midst of hatred and violence in the Middle East. But our troops are
making sacrifices for our short-term and long-term security — a
peaceful Iraq, a free Iraq, which is going to happen, will make
America more secure.
Part of our strength is the military. I intend to keep the military
————
231

strong. Our men and women are going to have what it needs to
keep the peace. Part of a strong America is a prosperous America.
That’s part of our strength. It’s not the strength. It’s part of the
reason we’re strong and we’ll keep our prosperity strong.
But the real strength of America is in the hearts and souls of
our citizens, and that’s important for our — our country to
understand. The true strength of this country happens when people
hear the universal call to love a neighbor just like they’d like to be
loved themselves. And here is a 10th grader in high school, who’s
heard that call, has taken time out of her life to mentor and tutor
children who may not have as much love in their life as she has
had because of her mom and dad, Lewis and Lady.
My call to the citizens of this country, whether they be in Fort
Smith, Arkansas or Van Buren, Arkansas, or anywhere else in the
country, is to take time out of your life and follow your heart and
help somebody who hurts: feed the hungry, provide shelter for the
homeless, surround somebody with love who wonders whether
or not their future is bright. No, the strength of this country, as
witnessed by this young soldier in the army of compassion, is the
heart and soul of the American people.
And another part of the strength of America is the fact we’ve
got a lot of teachers who care deeply about the students.It’s
probably going to take the students a little while to appreciate the
teachers. But I think when you look back, you’re going to find out
these people are some of the most important people you’ll ever
have in your life. And I’m not saying that just because I married a
teacher. By the way, Laura is doing fabulous.
The teachers here need to know that our nation appreciates
every man and woman who devotes a lifetime to building
knowledge and character of the young people of this country.
Teaching is one of the great callings, one of the most noble
professions, and America deeply appreciates the service of
America’s teachers. For those of you who are a teacher at this
school, thank you for what you do.
I’m here today to talk about making sure our schools work. A
————
232

little over two years ago, I signed into law an historic, bipartisan
act of Congress called the No Child Left Behind Act. And the
theory of this law was straightforward. And here’s what it said
— it said: The federal government is spending more money on
education, but for the first time, we’re asking for results. That’s a
change. In the past, we used to send checks from Washington. And
by the way, Washington should not be primary funder of schools in
America. That’s up to the states and the local people.
But we had targeted money, particularly for the poorer
students. And we helped to send the checks, and we just hoped
something good happened. That was the old way — here’s your
money, and maybe something positive will happen. Now we’re
sending the checks, and we’re asking the question, are the children
learning to read and write and add and subtract? That’s not that
tough a question, is it? It seems like it makes sense for taxpayers’
money — in return for taxpayers’ money, to determine whether or
not we’re meeting some basic goals. If you don’t ask the question,
you never find out the answer. If you don’t say, we’re sending you
more money, now please show us whether or not a child can read.
If you don’t ask, you’ll never know until it’s too late, until it’s too
late.
As well, we better figure out who needs help early before it’s
too late. I mean, one of the reasons you ask the question, can you
read or write and add and subtract, is you want to diagnose early.
You can’t solve a problem unless you diagnose it. The importance
of the No Child Left Behind Act is to find out who needs help.
And so, we’ve left behind an old attitude. See, I think some
schools — there was this attitude that certain students can’t learn.
And so this — might as well shuffle them on from grade to grade.
It’s easy to shuffle the so-called — what they call, hard-to-educate
students through the system. It’s easy to quit on families who might
live in inner-cities, or rural areas. It’s easy to quit on kids whose
parents don’t speak English as a first language. It’s easy, but it is
not fair. And that’s not how we do things in the United States of
America.
————
233

I believe every child can learn. That’s what I believe. And so
do the people here at this school. So we’ve raised the standards for
every public school. We’re challenging what I call the soft bigotry
of low expectations. We’re — we require testing in the basics, and
holding schools accountable for results. An accountability system
is how you determine whether or not what you’re doing in the
classrooms is working.
Under the new law, when children are falling behind, the
schools that need the most attention get extra help, extra money, so
the children can catch up. Let me repeat what I just said. Under the
new law, when we discover that children are falling behind, that are
not meeting standards, those schools get extra help, extra money to
make sure that people are brought up to the standards. Schools will
have time to improve. They will be able to use the accountability
system to determine if they have the right curricula. Sometimes
schools use the wrong curriculum. Sometimes they think this kind
of reading program works, when, in fact, it doesn’t. And they must
have times to adjust. But at some point, there has to be an end to
mediocrity.
The attitude in this bill says, no child should be trapped in a
school that does not teach and will not change. In other words,
there is time to change. There is time to change, but if you refuse
to change, and somebody is still trapped in the school that is not
meeting standards, then something has to happen. Parents need
options to help their child. Federal dollars will follow the child.
For example, if a school — a child is trapped in a school for
several years that is — that’s not meeting standards, the federal
government will pay for after-school tutoring, and the parent
can choose all kind of tutoring options, whether they be public
or private. One parent — a parent can send the school — a child
to a different public school. In other words, when — there has
to be accountability in order for a — I mean, there has to be a
consequence in order for an accountability system to work. When
schools do not improve year after year, without consequences, we
will not see change. That’s just a fact of life.
————
234

And so the new law says, you’ve got time to meet the
standards, which we have raised. You’ve got time to improve. But
because there’s now consequences, parents will have more say
in their child’s education. And that’s important, because we want
parents to be at the center of the education system in America.
We want our parents more involved. There’s no better way to get
parents involved than by publishing test results for each school.
Think about this — first of all, under the old system, a lot of
parents believed their local schools were doing just fine because
that’s what they were told. Oh, don’t worry, Johnnie is doing just
fine, our school is, too. But they never measured.
And sometimes, that wasn’t the case. Now parents don’t have
to take anybody’s word for it. They can see the results themselves.
An accountability system says, we’ll measure, but we’re going to
post the results for everybody to see. If they see excellence, just
like at this school, it will give solid ground to thank the teachers
and the principals for doing the job we expect. But if they see
failure, like any good parent, they’re going to want to know why.
Why can’t my school be like Butterfield? What is it about our
school that doesn’t match the performance of Butterfield Junior
High? In other words, an accountability system, when properly
used, will help people achieve a greater standards and will
encourage more parental involvement.
Now, let me make sure you understand one thing: I strongly
believe in local control of schools. I believe firmly — There is
a difference between asking the question about whether or not a
child is learning, and insisting that teachers and principals are free
to — are free to teach the way they see fit. Superintendents and
school boards are free to make change where they see change is
necessary.
The No Child Left Behind Act raises expectations, but leaves
control where it belongs, at the local level. See, you can’t provide
people excuses. There’s no better excuse than saying, I would have
done it this way, but the federal government told me to do it this
way. I fully understand that. In order to make sure that there is an
————
235

accountability system that works, you not only measure, but you
then say to people, it’s up to you to chart the path to excellence.
You don’t want federal bureaucrats who you’ve never seen in
Crawford County, Arkansas making the decision for the classrooms
in county — Crawford County, Arkansas. You need local control of
schools so people who are making those decisions are accountable
to the parents and the local citizens.
For more than two years we’ve been putting the new reforms
into action. All 50 states, plus the District of Columbia and
Puerto Rico, have now drawn up plans to measure performance in
every school. Notice — they drew up the plans. See, the state of
Arkansas drew up its accountability plans. People in Puerto Rico
decided the accountability system to use. This isn’t a federal test;
the local people, the state people made the decision as to how
to measure. And every state is reporting the information to the
parents.
And we’re seeing progress. Let me tell you the facts. The
test scores for 4th grade math around the nation went up 9 points
between the years 2000 and 2003. See, I’m able to tell you that
because we measure. If we hadn’t measured, I couldn’t tell you
that. Eighth graders improved by 5 points in the same period. In
other words, math scores are beginning to go up. Still too low, but
they’re heading toward higher standards. Reading scores for 4th
graders increased in the vast majority of states that tested between
1998 and 2003, including the state of Arkansas. See, your reading
scores are going up here.
I’ll never forget the day a woman looked at me — she’s an
African American friend of mine — and she said, you’ve got to
understand something, Governor Bush — at the time — reading
is the new civil right. See, if you can’t read, you can’t realize the
great promise of America. That’s why we want every child reading.
The good news is the reading scores are going up.
Since 2000, average math scores in Arkansas went up 13 points
in 4th grade, and 9 points in 8th grade. By the way, that’s higher
than the national average.
————
236

Things are happening in the country. When you raise the bar
and you hold people to account, it’s amazing the results you can
get. And that’s incredibly positive. Here at Butterfield Junior High,
you have every reason to be proud. In 2003, this school met the
adequate yearly progress standard expected under No Child Left
Behind. In other words, the state put out a set of criterion and
measurement standards, and you met it, right here at this school.
Let me tell you what Traci Sellers said. Is Traci here, by the
way? Probably not. Traci — I’m about to quote you. She’s an
English teacher. She said, “The No Child Left Behind makes us
aware of what we’re doing and how we can improve. It encourages
us as teachers to go that extra step, so that every child can
succeed.” I appreciate your attitude. I appreciate your hope.
Think about what she said — “it makes us aware of what
we’re doing.” In other words, are we doing the right thing; are
we meeting expectations? Am I doing my job, she says, and the
accountability system helps me understand whether I am or not.
She said, how can I improve. What a fantastic attitude. Here’s a
teacher who loves her children, says, I want to make sure I’m doing
the job, and if not, I want to figure out how to do the job better.
That’s why you have an accountability system. It says, it
encourages us. In other words, instead of being discouraged by
the system, it encourages. That’s not the way everybody feels in
America. There are people that don’t like to change, and there
are some complaints that I’d like to address today. Let me first
by telling you, I think it’s easier to make excuses sometimes than
needed improvements. That’s just human nature, isn’t it? But the
problem is we don’t need people making excuses for educational
failures in America. We need change.
When it comes to testing, I’ve heard every excuse in the book.
I bet the Governor has, too. See, we put strong accountability
measures in when I was the governor of Texas, and I went around
the state explaining it. And then the No Child Left Behind brought
an avalanche of complaints, as well. Some object to regular testing
because they believe schools will just teach the test — that’s what
————
237

you hear. I’m sure you’ve heard it. Well, think about that for a
minute. If a test measures basic knowledge, the basics in math or
reading, then teaching the test means you’re teaching a child the
basic knowledge of reading and math.
In other words, for a child to pass a reading test, you had better
understand how to read. And therefore, in order to help the child
pass the test, they’ve got to know how to read in the first place.
And the reading accountability systems help people determine
whether or not the child has got the basic tools necessary to be a
good reader. That’s what we’re talking about here.
The whole point is this: It is not enough to hope that students
are learning. I mean, that’s just, to me, an excuse why not to
measure. We need to know the ones who are learning and the ones
who are not learning. Some believe that the standards of No Child
Left Behind are too high. They say that if you raise expectations,
all you’re doing is setting up children to fail. Yet this law requires
students to perform at grade level, which doesn’t seem like it’s too
high a bar to cross.
I mean, we’re asking children to read at 3rd grade level if
you’re in the 3rd grade. Why is that raising expectations too
high? I mean, my goodness, that’s what society should expect. If
you want the kids to learn to read at grade level, then you better
insist they learn to read at grade level. That’s the standard that is
important. And it’s the standard that we must hold true to if we
want to make sure every child has a chance to succeed in our great
country.
Teachers and parents here today know this when it comes
to standards: If you expect nothing from a child, if you expect
low — if you have low standards for every child, don’t be
surprised at what you get. That’s a fact of life. When you have
high expectations, children have a way of rising to meet those
expectations. High standards do not set children on a path to
failure; high standards set our children on the path to success.
Other critics say it is unfair to measure the performance of
minority groups, and unfair to require schools to improve the
————
238

scores amongst all groups. That’s a complaint you hear. These
critics say we shouldn’t fault a whole school just because some
African American or Spanish students are not progressing. They’re
missing the — the people who say that missed the entire purpose of
the law, and that is, to make sure that no child of any background is
left behind. See, that’s the purpose of this law.
The reason we measure success and problems group by group
— that’s what’s called disaggregating data. In other words, we want
to know — we don’t want to look at the school as a whole; we want
to look at the people in the school. And that’s the difference. We
want to look at the data based upon individuals. We want to know
student performance. See, you’ve got to make sure the schools are
serving every student. So in other words, when you look at the
school as a whole, you don’t know whether or not certain children
are being left behind. You don’t know whether certain children
need extra help.
And there’s an achievement gap here in America today that
we’ve got to close. There’s an achievement gap between the test
scores of white and minority students. Nationally, on reading
tests, black and Hispanic 4th graders score at least 26 percentage
points lower than white students in the same grade. We’ve got to
do something about that. If we want this country to be a hopeful
country for every citizen, if we want to make sure every person
can realize the American Dream, we’ve got to close this gap. And
what the accountability system — they’ll help us close that gap by
determining who needs help. We want America to be promising for
every single child of every background so that not one single child
in America is left behind.
Another claim is that under the new law, we’re punishing
schools that are not making progress. See, sometimes when you
change, people are quick to criticize. And one of the complaints is
that schools get punished that aren’t making progress. But people
who make that claim ought to read the law. The truth is, the lowestperforming schools are getting extra money to improve. That’s
what — that’s the truth.
————
239

In 2003, we spent $234 million to assist underperforming
schools to make sure people aren’t left behind. In other words, we
said, here’s a problem, and here’s some extra money to help you fix
it. In 2004, we’ll at least double that amount. In other words, the
federal government is saying, measure, and, oh, by the way, when
we find mediocrity, we’ll help. But the local people have got to
change. You’ve got to change what you’re doing in order to make
sure that children can learn. We expect schools to do their job and
we’re helping them do their job.
We also understand it can take some time to get there. Some
say the No Child Left Behind Act doesn’t provide enough money
to meet our goals. First, let me tell you again what I said: It’s the
primary responsibility of the state and local governments to fund
schools, not the federal government. But the additional testing
required by the law — in other words, the federal government did
say, okay, you’ve got to test in return for money. We’re helping to
pay for the tests. People say, well, it’s an unfunded mandate to put
accountability systems in place. No, the accountability systems are
largely funded by the federal government.
Second, if my 2005 budget is enacted, federal spending on
elementary and high school education will have increased by
49 percent since 2001. In Arkansas, that’s an extra $112 million
federal dollars for your public schools compared to 2001.
Nationwide, since 2001, we’ve already increased funding for
low-income schools, under Title I — that’s the money for the
poorest of students — by 41 percent. That will rise to 52 percent
if Congress approves my budget, which would mean an additional
$37 million to help people in this state.
In other words, we’re doing our duty. We understand that
people need extra help when it comes time to addressing problems
early, before they’re too late. And the federal government is
responding. And I also want to remind you that we’ve done another
thing — and Laura is very much involved with this. We’ve kicked
off a major initiative to make sure our children can read at grade
level by the 3rd grade. We have quadrupled federal funding since
————
240

2001 for America’s reading programs — by the way, making
sure that when we fund programs, that they used — that they use
scientifically-based programs, reading — not programs that sound
like they might work, but programs which actually do work in
teaching the children of America how to read.
This No Child Left Behind Act is a good law. It’s a good, solid
law. But I understand some adjustments need to be made, even in
the best laws. So we’ve listened to schools and teachers, and we’re
responding in practical ways. We’re making sure that the progress
of special ed students is judged by standards appropriate to their
development. In other words, as you measure a special ed student,
there must be some flexibility in the measurement standards. And
we know that.
We’re giving schools more time to bring students who don’t
speak English as a first language into the accountability system.
If a fellow shows up at school and can’t speak Spanish — I mean
English — and only speaks Spanish, they need some time to learn
the language before they become a part of the accountability
system. They don’t need a lifetime of learning, but there needs to
be some flexibility in the accountability systems.
We’re giving schools in rural areas more latitude in meeting
teacher qualification standards. In other words, we’re flexible in
the application of the law. Yet I will never compromise on this
goal: Every child can learn the basics, and every school must teach
the basics.
A lot of the No Child Left Behind Act is — focuses on early
grades, and that’s good. In other words, my attitude is, and I
think the attitude of the experts is, when we get it right early in
the grades and stay focused, we’re going to have a bunch of kids
getting into high school who are literate, smart and capable.
But right now we’ve got some people that need help when
it comes to reading. I mean, there have been some kids that have
been shuffled through that are now in high school, and they’re
struggling to learn how to read. And we’d better get it right
now, before they get out. And so I’m asking Congress to pass
————
241

$100 million Striving Reading Initiative, intensive intervention
in children’s lives who cannot read, before they get out of high
school. It’s an essential part — I mean, that’s the minimum we can
do. That’s the basic part of making sure that a child has hope.
We’ll use resources to help the school districts to train teachers
so they can get the right kind of help and use a curriculum that
works. I mean, there are good curriculum that cam work. The
school districts need the help of implementing those curriculum,
and that’s what this money will be for.
I also proposed a $120 million increase for the Mathematics
and Science Partnership Program. In other words, we want to make
sure kids can read; we also want to make sure they can do math
and science. But we’ve got some new jobs that are being created
that require new skill sets, and it’s not good enough to shuffle
kids out of the schools that don’t know anything about math and
science. And so the creation of these partnerships will help school
districts set up effective math and science programs.
I believe that in every school we ought to continue to raise
the bar, and one way to do so is to make sure that the Advanced
Placement Programs are vibrant and active across our country.
Right here at Butterfield, you offer pre-8 AP courses, which is
good — preparing these children to take advanced placement.
Advance placement means you’re raising the bar as high as you
can possibly go.
I proposed increasing money from the federal government,
double the current amount we spend, for teacher training, to help
good-hearted teachers become AP teachers. And I full recognize,
as well, there are some low-income students. When they go home
and say, look, I’m getting ready to take the AP exam, and the
mother or father say, how much does it cost, and they lay out the
cost of the AP exam. The mother or dad says, no, I think we’ll use
the money for something else, see. So the child prepares to take
the AP, and then mom or dad look at the fund — look at the cost,
they say, no, we’d like for you to take the AP exam, but we need
this money for rent or food. The federal government ought to help
————
242

low-income students pay for the fee so they can take the AP exam.
We want to be raising the bar for every student and the entry fee
should not be an excuse.
One of the things we need to do is encourage math and science
professionals from the private sector to teach part-time in our
high schools. And so we’ve got what’s called the Adjunct Teacher
Corps, which is a neat program, when you think about it. We’ve got
somebody here in Fort Smith, Arkansas who’s an engineer. They
may have — he or she may have worked for awhile, and they may
be retired, and the school district —
I don’t know — I don’t know if the high school principal is
looking for a science teacher or not, he may be. But it makes sense
to have — to encourage citizens to get back in the classroom as a
second career, to lend their talents.
You’ve got what you call a State Scholars Program here in
Arkansas. Governor, thanks for implementing it. It’s an initiative
that we announced here two years ago, which brings businesses
and college officials in the middle and — middle schools and high
schools to encourage students to take a more demanding course
work load.
In other words, when you get — people can get inspired to take
tougher courses, we ought to try to do so. The program is raising
the completion rates in algebra II and chemistry and physics among
Arkansas high school students. In other words, you’ve got more
students now taking algebra II and chemistry and physics, and
that’s going to benefit your state.
See, when you’ve got people with those skills getting out of
high school, and somebody is looking to put a business here, they
can say, look at this — look at the base of knowledge amongst
people that we can employ in this state. People are likely to bring
work here if the potential work force has got the basics in math and
science.
And that’s what you’re doing. I want to expand the State
Scholars Program nationwide, just like we’ve done here in
Arkansas. It’s effective. It works. And there ought to be incentives
————
243

to encourage students. And one way to do so, is to give those
students who finish a State Scholars Program a boost in their Pell
Grant scholarship.
In other words, we’re saying to kids in high school, reach
higher; here’s some people to help you reach higher, some local
college folks or business people. And by the way, when you take a
tougher course load and pass, you get additional scholarship money
from the Pell Grant. We’ve expanded Pell Grants. I want to enrich
them to encourage students to reach for the stars.
So I’ve sent a proposal to Congress where they would receive
an additional $1,000 during each of their first two years of college.
This will help 4,000 Arkansas seniors a year. This will provide
incentive for people to say, I want to do a better job in high school.
What I’m here to tell you is, I understand that public education is
essential to the future of this country. It’s essential we get it right.
I’m here at Butterfield because I understand a good school is the
gateway to hope. And we want that gate open all across America.
After decades of missed opportunities, after missing chances to
make sure every child has got — got the basics to succeed, we
finally reformed the public schools of America. It took a lot of work.
It took a lot of work to convince people that change is needed.
But Congress — listen, we passed a bill. Let me tell you
something, when you get a “yes” vote from both senators of
Arkansas and both senators from Texas and both senators from
Massachusetts, you’ve got yourself a bipartisan piece of legislation.
And we’re not backing down. I don’t care how much pressure
they try to put on the process. I’m not changing my mind about
high standards and the need for accountability, because I know the
promise that holds out for the —
We’re not going back to those days where we just kind of hope
something happens. We’re not going back to the days where kids
just got moved through and they weren’t sure whether or not they
could read, and at the end of the system, they said, oops, they
can’t read. Those day were too pessimistic for me, and they don’t
represent the great values of the United States of America. See,
————
244

we believe in the dignity of every human being. We believe in the
worth of every child. We’re optimistic people. We believe in raising
the standards. We believe in giving schools the resources and
flexibility they need. We have begun a new era in public education
for the good of the United States of America.
I better quit before some of us fall out. I know it. When you
get the President, and he blows a lot of hot air — But I do want
to thank you for your hospitality. I want to thank the people of this
good school for believing in — believing in the best, for having
such a clear vision about what’s possible, about believing in the
worth of every child. I want to thank the teachers. I appreciate your
love and compassion. I want to thank you for never settling for
mediocrity, for always aiming high.
I want to thank the citizens who are here, the moms and dads.
By the way, a child’s first teacher is a mother or a father. That’s the
first teacher a child has. I like to remind people that we need to
promote a culture of personal responsibility in America that starts
with — moms and dads understand, they’re responsible for loving
their child with all their heart.
And by the way, a part of that personal responsibility society
is one that says, if you’ve got a problem with the school in the
community in which you live, you do something about it. See?
You don’t rely on some far away government to take care of it. Do
something about it.
Part of the responsibility era says if you’re a CEO in corporate
America, you’re responsible for telling the truth to your
shareholders and your employees. And finally, a responsibility
society is one in which each of us loves our neighbor just like we’d
like to be loved ourself. It’s such an honor to be here at Butterfield,
in Van Buren, Arkansas. I’m proud to be here. Thanks for coming
out to say hello. May God bless you all, and may God continue to
bless the United States of America.
Mrs. Reagan, Patti, Michael, and Ron; members of the Reagan
family; distinguished guests, including our Presidents and First
Ladies; Reverend Danforth; fellow citizens:
We lost Ronald Reagan only days ago, but we have missed
him for a long time. We have missed his kindly presence, that
reassuring voice, and the happy ending we had wished for him. It
has been ten years since he said his own farewell; yet it is still very
sad and hard to let him go. Ronald Reagan belongs to the ages now,
but we preferred it when he belonged to us.
In a life of good fortune, he valued above all the gracious
gift of his wife, Nancy. During his career, Ronald Reagan passed
through a thousand crowded places; but there was only one person,
he said, who could make him lonely by just leaving the room.
America honors you, Nancy, for the loyalty and love you gave
this man on a wonderful journey, and to that journey’s end. Today,
our whole nation grieves with you and your family.
When the sun sets tonight off the coast of California, and we
lay to rest our 40th President, a great American story will close.
The second son of Nell and Jack Reagan first knew the world as
a place of open plains, quiet streets, gas-lit rooms, and carriages
drawn by horse. If you could go back to the Dixon, Illinois of
1922, you’d find a boy of 11 reading adventure stories at the public
library, or running with his brother, Neil, along Rock River, and
coming home to a little house on Hennepin Avenue. That town was
the kind of place you remember where you prayed side by side
with your neighbors, and if things were going wrong for them,
you prayed for them, and knew they’d pray for you if things went
wrong for you.
————
247

The Reagan family would see its share of hardship, struggle
and uncertainty. And out of that circumstance came a young man
of steadiness, calm, and a cheerful confidence that life would bring
good things. The qualities all of us have seen in Ronald Reagan
were first spotted 70 and 80 years ago. As a lifeguard in Lowell
Park, he was the protector keeping an eye out for trouble. As a
sports announcer on the radio, he was the friendly voice that made
you see the game as he did. As an actor, he was the handsome, allAmerican, good guy, which, in his case, required knowing his lines
— and being himself.
Along the way, certain convictions were formed and fixed in
the man. Ronald Reagan believed that everything happened for a
reason, and that we should strive to know and do the will of God.
He believed that the gentleman always does the kindest thing. He
believed that people were basically good, and had the right to be
free. He believed that bigotry and prejudice were the worst things a
person could be guilty of. He believed in the Golden Rule and in the
power of prayer. He believed that America was not just a place in
the world, but the hope of the world.
And he believed in taking a break now and then, because, as he
said, there’s nothing better for the inside of a man than the outside
of a horse.
Ronald Reagan spent decades in the film industry and in
politics, fields known, on occasion, to change a man. But not this
man. From Dixon to Des Moines, to Hollywood to Sacramento, to
Washington, D.C., all who met him remembered the same sincere,
honest, upright fellow. Ronald Reagan’s deepest beliefs never had
much to do with fashion or convenience. His convictions were
always politely stated, affably argued, and as firm and straight as the
columns of this cathedral.
There came a point in Ronald Reagan’s film career when people
started seeing a future beyond the movies. The actor, Robert
Cummings, recalled one occasion. “I was sitting around the set with
all these people and we were listening to Ronnie, quite absorbed.
I said, ‘Ron, have you ever considered someday becoming
————
248

President?’ He said, ‘President of what?’ ‘President of the United
States,’ I said. And he said, ‘What’s the matter, don’t you like my
acting either?’”
The clarity and intensity of Ronald Reagan’s convictions led
to speaking engagements around the country, and a new following
he did not seek or expect. He often began his speeches by saying,
“I’m going to talk about controversial things.” And then he
spoke of communist rulers as slavemasters, of a government in
Washington that had far overstepped its proper limits, of a time
for choosing that was drawing near. In the space of a few years, he
took ideas and principles that were mainly found in journals and
books, and turned them into a broad, hopeful movement ready to
govern.
As soon as Ronald Reagan became California’s governor,
observers saw a star in the West — tanned, well-tailored, in
command, and on his way. In the 1960s, his friend, Bill Buckley,
wrote, “Reagan is indisputably a part of America, and he may
become a part of American history.”
Ronald Reagan’s moment arrived in 1980. He came out ahead
of some very good men, including one from Plains, and one from
Houston. What followed was one of the decisive decades of the
century, as the convictions that shaped the President began to
shape the times.
He came to office with great hopes for America, and more
than hopes — like the President he had revered and once saw in
person, Franklin Roosevelt, Ronald Reagan matched an optimistic
temperament with bold, persistent action. President Reagan was
optimistic about the great promise of economic reform, and
he acted to restore the reward and spirit of enterprise. He was
optimistic that a strong America could advance the peace, and he
acted to build the strength that mission required. He was optimistic
that liberty would thrive wherever it was planted, and he acted to
defend liberty wherever it was threatened.
And Ronald Reagan believed in the power of truth in the
conduct of world affairs. When he saw evil camped across the
————
249

horizon, he called that evil by its name. There were no doubters in
the prisons and gulags, where dissidents spread the news, tapping
to each other in code what the American President had dared to say.
There were no doubters in the shipyards and churches and secret
labor meetings, where brave men and women began to hear the
creaking and rumbling of a collapsing empire. And there were no
doubters among those who swung hammers at the hated wall as the
first and hardest blow had been struck by President Ronald Reagan.
The ideology he opposed throughout his political life insisted
that history was moved by impersonal ties and unalterable fates.
Ronald Reagan believed instead in the courage and triumph of free
men. And we believe it, all the more, because we saw that courage
in him.
As he showed what a President should be, he also showed us
what a man should be. Ronald Reagan carried himself, even in
the most powerful office, with a decency and attention to small
kindnesses that also defined a good life. He was a courtly, gentle
and considerate man, never known to slight or embarrass others.
Many people across the country cherish letters he wrote in his own
hand — to family members on important occasions; to old friends
dealing with sickness and loss; to strangers with questions about
his days in Hollywood. A boy once wrote to him requesting federal
assistance to help clean up his bedroom.
The President replied that, “unfortunately, funds are
dangerously low.” He continued, “I’m sure your mother was fully
justified in proclaiming your room a disaster. Therefore, you are in
an excellent position to launch another volunteer program in our
nation. Congratulations.”
Sure, our 40th President wore his title lightly, and it fit like a
white Stetson. In the end, through his belief in our country and his
love for our country, he became an enduring symbol of our country.
We think of his steady stride, that tilt of a head and snap of a salute,
the big-screen smile, and the glint in his Irish eyes when a story
came to mind.
We think of a man advancing in years with the sweetness and
————
250

sincerity of a Scout saying the Pledge. We think of that grave
expression that sometimes came over his face, the seriousness of a
man angered by injustice — and frightened by nothing. We know,
as he always said, that America’s best days are ahead of us, but
with Ronald Reagan’s passing, some very fine days are behind us,
and that is worth our tears.
Americans saw death approach Ronald Reagan twice, in a
moment of violence, and then in the years of departing light. He
met both with courage and grace. In these trials, he showed how a
man so enchanted by life can be at peace with life’s end.
And where does that strength come from? Where is that
courage learned? It is the faith of a boy who read the Bible with
his mom. It is the faith of a man lying in an operating room, who
prayed for the one who shot him before he prayed for himself. It is
the faith of a man with a fearful illness, who waited on the Lord to
call him home.
Now, death has done all that death can do. And as Ronald
Wilson Reagan goes his way, we are left with the joyful hope he
shared. In his last years, he saw through a glass darkly. Now he
sees his Savior face to face.
And we look to that fine day when we will see him again, all
weariness gone, clear of mind, strong and sure, and smiling again,
and the sorrow of his parting gone forever.
May God bless Ronald Reagan, and the country he loved.

Good morning. Thank you, Henry. Laura and I appreciate
you all coming. President Clinton and Senator Clinton, welcome
home. All who live here are temporary residents; the portraits that
are presented today will be held permanently in the White House
collection for all the ages. And so beginning today, the likenesses
of President William Jefferson Clinton and First Lady Hillary
Rodham Clinton will take their place in a line that began with
George and Martha Washington.
Laura and I are pleased to welcome members of the Clinton
and Rodham family, thank you all for coming. It’s great to see
Chelsea. The fact that you survived your teenage years in the
White House speaks to the fact that you had a great mom and dad
We are pleased that Mrs. Dorothy Rodham is here. Welcome,
we’re glad you’re here. And those two boys you’re still trying to
raise. Hugh and Tony, thank you for coming, we’re glad you’re
here. It’s good to see so many who served our nation so ably in the
Clinton administration. Thank you all for coming back. Thanks for
your service to the country, and welcome back to the White House.
We’re really glad you’re here and I know the President is, as well.
As you might know, my father and I have decided to call each
other by numbers. He’s 41, I’m 43. It’s a great honor to — it’s a
great pleasure to honor number 42. We’re glad you’re here, 42.
The years have done a lot to clarify the strengths of this man. As
a candidate for any office, whether it be the state attorney general
or the President, Bill Clinton showed incredible energy and great
personal appeal. As chief executive, he showed a deep and farranging knowledge of public policy, a great compassion for people
in need, and the forward-looking spirit the Americans like in a
————
253

President. Bill Clinton could always see a better day ahead — and
Americans knew he was working hard to bring that day closer.
Over eight years, it was clear that Bill Clinton loved the job
of the presidency. He filled this house with energy and joy. He’s
a man of enthusiasm and warmth, who could make a compelling
case and effectively advance the causes that drew him to public
service.
People saw those gifts very early in Bill Clinton. He is
remembered in Hope, Arkansas, and other places along the way, as
an eager, good-hearted boy who seemed destined for big things. I
was particularly struck by the story of a nun at St. John’s School
in Hot Springs who decided that Billy Clinton should get a C in
deportment. That was a rare grade for the future Rhodes Scholar
and President. So Bill’s mother gave the nun a call to see what was
wrong. The sister replied, “Oh, nothing much. But let me tell you,
this boy knows the answer to every question and he just leaps to
his feet before anyone else can.” She went on, you know, “I know
he’ll not tolerate this C, but it’ll be good for him. And I promise
you, if he wants to be, he will be President someday.”
People in Bill Clinton’s life have always expected him to
succeed — and, more than that, they wanted him to succeed. And
meeting those expectations took more than charm and intellect —
it took hard work and drive and determination and optimism. And
after all, you’ve got to be optimistic to give six months of your life
running the McGovern campaign in Texas.
He won his first statewide office at age 30, sworn in as
governor at 32. He was a five-time governor of Arkansas, the first
man from that state to become the President. He’s also the first
man in his party since Franklin Roosevelt to win a second term in
the White House. And I could tell you more of the story, but it’s
coming out in fine bookstores all over America.
At every stage in the extraordinary rise of Bill Clinton, from
the little ranch house on Scully Street to 1600 Pennsylvania
Avenue, he and Roger had a wonderful, loving mother. And I am
certain that Virginia Kelley would be filled with incredible pride
————
254

this morning.
And so would Hugh Rodham, Senior. Mr. Rodham did have
the joy of seeing his only daughter become America’s First Lady.
And I know he would not be surprised to see her as she is today, an
elected United States Senator, and a woman greatly admired in our
country. From the earliest days of her youth in Park Ridge, Illinois,
Hillary Rodham impressed her family and friends as a person of
great ability and serious purpose. At Maine Township High School
South, at Wellesley College, and at Yale Law School, classmates
saw her not just an achiever, but as a role model and as a leader.
She inspires respect and loyalty from those who know her, and it
was a good day in both their lives when they met at the library at
Yale Law School Library.
Hillary’s commitment to public service continued when she
left this house. Listen, New York politics is a serious business —
it’s rough business. It takes an extraordinary person to campaign
and win the United States Senate. She has proven herself more
equal to the challenge. And she takes an interesting spot on
American history today, for she is the only sitting senator whose
portrait hangs in the White House.
The paintings of the Clintons are the work of a fine American
artist, Simmie Knox. Mr. Knox has rendered portraits of a Supreme
Court Justice, a Cabinet minister, a mayor and members of
Congress. And today we thank him for putting his skilled hand to
the portraits that are about to be unveiled.
More than 40 years have passed since a boy of 16 came
here to the White House with a group from the American Legion
Boys Nation. On that day in the summer of 1963, Bill Clinton of
Arkansas looked into the face of John F. Kennedy, and left the
Rose Garden feeling very proud that he had shaken the hand of a
President. Today he can be even prouder of decades of service, and
effort, and perseverance that brought him back to this place as the
42nd President of the United States.
My congratulations to you both. And now will you to join me
on stage for the presentation.

Thank you all. Mr. Chairman — Mr. Chairman, delegates,
fellow citizens: I am honored by your support, and I accept your
nomination for President of the United States.
When I — when I said those words four years ago, none of us
could have envisioned what these years would bring. In the heart of
this great city, we saw tragedy arrive on a quiet morning. We saw
the bravery of rescuers grow with danger. We learned of passengers
on a doomed plane who died with a courage that frightened their
killers. We have seen a shaken economy rise to its feet. And we
have seen Americans in uniform storming mountain strongholds,
and charging through sandstorms, and liberating millions, with acts
of valor that would make the men of Normandy proud.
Since 2001, Americans have been given hills to climb, and
found the strength to climb them. Now, because we have made the
hard journey, we can see the valley below. Now, because we have
faced challenges with resolve, we have historic goals within our
reach, and greatness in our future. We will build a safer world and a
more hopeful America — and nothing will hold us back.
In the work we have done, and the work we will do, I am
fortunate to have a superb Vice President. I have counted on Dick
Cheney’s calm and steady judgment in difficult days, and I am
honored to have him at my side.
I am grateful to share my walk in life with Laura Bush.
Americans — Americans have come to see the goodness and
kindness and strength I first saw 26 years ago, and we love our First
Lady.
I’m a fortunate father of two spirited, intelligent, and lovely
young women. I’m blessed with a sister and brothers who are my
closest friends. And I will always be the proud and grateful son of
————
257

George and Barbara Bush.
My father served eight years at the side of another great
American — Ronald Reagan. His spirit of optimism and goodwill
and decency are in this hall, and are in our hearts, and will always
define our party.
Two months from today, voters will make a choice based on
the records we have built, the convictions we hold, and the vision
that guides us forward. A presidential election is a contest for the
future. Tonight I will tell you where I stand, what I believe, and
where I will lead this country in the next four years.
I believe — I believe every child can learn, and every school
must teach — so we passed the most important federal education
reform in history. Because we acted, children are making sustained
progress in reading and math, America’s schools are getting better,
and nothing will hold us back.
I believe we have a moral responsibility to honor America’s
seniors — so I brought Republicans and Democrats together to
strengthen Medicare. Now seniors are getting immediate help
buying medicine. Soon every senior will be able to get prescription
drug coverage, and nothing will hold us back.
I believe in the energy and innovative spirit of America’s
workers, entrepreneurs, farmers, and ranchers — so we unleashed
that energy with the largest tax relief in a generation. Because
we acted, our economy is growing again, and creating jobs, and
nothing will hold us back.
I believe the most solemn duty of the American President is
to protect the American people. If America shows uncertainty or
weakness in this decade, the world will drift toward tragedy. This
will not happen on my watch.
I’m running for President with a clear and positive plan to
build a safer world, and a more hopeful America. I’m running with
a compassionate conservative philosophy: that government should
help people improve their lives, not try to run their lives. I believe
this nation wants steady, consistent, principled leadership — and
that is why, with your help, we will win this election. The story of
————
258

America is the story of expanding liberty: an ever-widening circle,
constantly growing to reach further and include more. Our nation’s
founding commitment is still our deepest commitment: In our
world, and here at home, we will extend the frontiers of freedom.
The times in which we live and work are changing
dramatically. The workers of our parents’ generation typically
had one job, one skill, one career, often with one company that
provided health care and a pension. And most of those workers
were men. Today, workers change jobs, even careers, many times
during their lives, and in one of the most dramatic shifts our
society has seen, two-thirds of all moms also work outside the
home.
This changed world can be a time of great opportunity for all
Americans to earn a better living, support your family, and have a
rewarding career. And government must take your side. Many of
our most fundamental systems — the tax code, health coverage,
pension plans, worker training — were created for the world of
yesterday, not tomorrow. We will transform these systems so that
all citizens are equipped, prepared — and thus truly free — to
make your own choices and pursue your own dreams.
My plan begins with providing the security and opportunity
of a growing economy. We now compete in a global market that
provides new buyers for our goods, but new competition for
our workers. To create more jobs in America, America must be
the best place in the world to do business. To create jobs, my
plan will encourage investment and expansion by restraining
federal spending, reducing regulation, and making the tax
relief permanent. To create jobs, we will make our country less
dependent on foreign sources of energy. To create jobs, we will
expand trade and level the playing field to sell American goods
and services across the globe. And we must protect small business
owners and workers from the explosion of frivolous lawsuits that
threaten jobs across America.
Another drag on our economy is the current tax code, which
is a complicated mess — filled with special interest loopholes,
————
259

saddling our people with more than six billion hours of paperwork
and headache every year. The American people deserve — and our
economic future demands — a simpler, fairer, pro-growth system.
In a new term, I will lead a bipartisan effort to reform and simplify
the federal tax code.
Another priority in a new term will be to help workers take
advantage of the expanding economy to find better and higherpaying jobs. In this time of change, many workers want to go back
to school to learn different or higher-level skills. So we will double
the number of people served by our principal job training program
and increase funding for our community colleges. I know that
with the right skills, American workers can compete with anyone,
anywhere in the world.
In this time of change, opportunity in some communities is
more distant than in others. To stand with workers in poor
communities — and those that have lost manufacturing, textile, and
other jobs — we will create American opportunity zones. In these
areas, we will provide tax relief and other incentives to attract new
business, and improve housing and job training to bring hope and
work throughout all of America.
As I’ve traveled the country, I’ve met many workers and small
business owners who have told me they are worried they cannot
afford health care. More than half of the uninsured are small
business employees and their families. In a new term, we must
allow small firms to join together to purchase insurance at the
discounts available to big companies.
We will offer a tax credit to encourage small businesses and
their employees to set up health savings accounts, and provide
direct help for low-income Americans to purchase them. These
accounts give workers the security of insurance against major
illness, the opportunity to save tax-free for routine health expenses,
and the freedom of knowing you can take your account with you
whenever you change jobs. We will provide low-income Americans
with better access to health care: In a new term, I will ensure every
poor county in America has a community or rural health center.
————
260

As I have traveled our country, I have met too many good
doctors, especially OB/GYNS, who are being forced out of practice
because of the high cost of lawsuits. To make health care more
affordable and accessible, we must pass medical liability reform
now. And in all we do to improve health care in America, we will
make sure that health decisions are made by doctors and patients,
not by bureaucrats in Washington, D.C.
In this time of change, government must take the side of
working families. In a new term, we will change outdated labor
laws to offer comp-time and flex-time. Our laws should never stand
in the way of a more family-friendly workplace.
Another priority for a new term is to build an ownership
society, because ownership brings security, and dignity, and
independence.
Thanks to our policies, homeownership in America is at an
all-time high. Tonight we set a new goal: seven million more
affordable homes in the next 10 years so more American families
will be able to open the door and say: Welcome to my home.
In an ownership society, more people will own their health
care plans, and have the confidence of owning a piece of their
retirement. We’ll always keep the promise of Social Security
for our older workers. With the huge Baby Boom generation
approaching retirement, many of our children and grandchildren
understandably worry whether Social Security will be there when
they need it. We must strengthen Social Security by allowing
younger workers to save some of their taxes in a personal account
— a nest egg you can call your own, and government can never
take away.
In all these proposals, we seek to provide not just a government
program, but a path — a path to greater opportunity, more freedom,
and more control over your own life.
And the path begins with our youngest Americans. To build a
more hopeful America, we must help our children reach as far as
their vision and character can take them. Tonight, I remind every
parent and every teacher, I say to every child: No matter what your
————
261

circumstance, no matter where you live, your school will be the
path to promise of America.
We are transforming our schools by raising standards and
focusing on results. We are insisting on accountability, empowering
parents and teachers, and making sure that local people are in
charge of their schools. By testing every child, we are identifying
those who need help — and we are providing a record level of
funding to get them that help. In northeast Georgia, Gainesville
Elementary School is mostly Hispanic and 90 percent poor — and
this year 90 percent of the students passed state tests in reading and
math. The principal — the principal expresses the philosophy of
his school this way: “We don’t focus on what we can’t do at this
school; we focus on what we can do. And we do whatever it takes
to get kids across the finish line.” See, this principal is challenging
the soft bigotry of low expectations. And that is the spirit of
our education reform, and the commitment of our country: No
dejaremos a ningn nio atrs. We will leave no child behind.
We are making progress — we are making progress, and there
is more to do.
In this time of change, most new jobs are filled by people with
at least two years of college, yet only about one in four students
gets there. In our high schools, we will fund early intervention
programs to help students at risk. We will place a new focus on
math and science. As we make progress, we will require a rigorous
exam before graduation. By raising performance in our high
schools, and expanding Pell grants for low and middle income
families, we will help more Americans start their career with a
college diploma.
America’s children must also have a healthy start in life. In
a new term, we will lead an aggressive effort to enroll millions
of poor children who are eligible but not signed up for the
government’s health insurance programs. We will not allow a lack
of attention, or information, to stand between these children and
the health care they need.
Anyone who wants more details on my agenda can find them

online. The web address is not very imaginative, but it’s easy to
remember: GeorgeWBush.com.
These changing times can be exciting times of expanded
opportunity. And here, you face a choice. My opponent’s policies
are dramatically different from ours. Senator Kerry opposed
Medicare reform and health savings accounts. After supporting my
education reforms, he now wants to dilute them. He opposes legal
and medical liability reform. He opposed reducing the marriage
penalty, opposed doubling the child credit, opposed lowering
income taxes for all who pay them.
Wait a minute, wait a minute: To be fair, there are some things
my opponent is for. He’s proposed more than two trillion dollars
in new federal spending so far, and that’s a lot, even for a senator
from Massachusetts. And to pay for that spending, he’s running on
a platform of increasing taxes — and that’s the kind of promise a
politician usually keeps.
His tax — his policies of tax and spend — of expanding
government rather than expanding opportunity — are the policies
of the past. We are on the path to the future — and we’re not
turning back.
In this world of change, some things do not change: the values
we try to live by, the institutions that give our lives meaning and
purpose. Our society rests on a foundation of responsibility and
character and family commitment.
Because family and work are sources of stability and dignity,
I support welfare reform that strengthens family and requires
work. Because a caring society will value its weakest members,
we must make a place for the unborn child. Because — because
religious charities provide a safety net of mercy and compassion,
our government must never discriminate against them. Because
the union of a man and woman deserves an honored place in our
society, I support the protection of marriage against activist judges.
And I will continue to appoint federal judges who know the
difference between personal opinion and the strict interpretation of
the law.
————
263

My opponent recently announced that he is the conservative
— the candidate of “conservative values,” which must have come
as a surprise to a lot of his supporters. There’s some problems
with this claim. If you say the heart and soul of America is found
in Hollywood, I’m afraid you’re not the candidate of conservative
values. If you voted against the bipartisan Defense of Marriage
Act, which President Clinton signed, you are not the candidate of
conservative values. If you gave a speech, as my opponent did,
calling the Reagan presidency eight years of “moral darkness,” then
you may be a lot of things, but the candidate of conservative values
is not one of them.
This election will also determine how America responds to the
continuing danger of terrorism — and you know where I stand.
Three days after September the 11th, I stood where Americans died,
in the ruins of the Twin Towers. Workers in hard hats were shouting
to me, “Whatever it takes.” A fellow grabbed me by the arm and
he said, “Do not let me down.” Since that day, I wake up every
morning thinking about how to better protect our country. I will
never relent in defending America, whatever it takes.
So we have fought the terrorists across the earth — not for
pride, not for power, but because the lives of our citizens are at
stake. Our strategy is clear. We have tripled funding for homeland
security and trained a half a million first responders, because we
are determined to protect our homeland. We are transforming our
military and reforming and strengthening our intelligence services.
We are staying on the offensive — striking terrorists abroad — so
we do not have to face them here at home. And we are working
to advance liberty in the broader Middle East, because freedom
will bring a future of hope, and the peace we all want. And we will
prevail.
Our strategy is succeeding.
Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of al-Qaeda,
Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups, Saudi Arabia was
fertile ground for terrorist fundraising, Libya was secretly pursuing
nuclear weapons, Iraq was a gathering threat, and al-Qaeda was
————
264

largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. Today, the government
of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror, Pakistan is capturing
terrorist leaders, Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests, Libya
is dismantling its weapons programs, the army of a free Iraq is
fighting for freedom, and more than three-quarters of al-Qaeda’s
key members and associates have been detained or killed. We
have led, many have joined, and America and the world are safer.
This progress involved careful diplomacy, clear moral
purpose, and some tough decisions. And the toughest came on
Iraq. We knew Saddam Hussein’s record of aggression and support
for terror. We knew his long history of pursuing, even using,
weapons of mass destruction. And we know that September the
11th requires our country to think differently: We must, and we
will, confront threats to America before it is too late.
In Saddam Hussein, we saw a threat. Members of both
political parties, including my opponent and his running mate,
saw the threat, and voted to authorize the use of force. We went to
the United Nations Security Council, which passed a unanimous
resolution demanding the dictator disarm, or face serious
consequences. Leaders in the Middle East urged him to comply.
After more than a decade of diplomacy, we gave Saddam Hussein
another chance, a final chance, to meet his responsibilities to the
civilized world. He again refused, and I faced the kind of decision
that comes only to the Oval Office — a decision no president
would ask for, but must be prepared to make. Do I forget the
lessons of September the 11th and take the word of a madman, or
do I take action to defend our country? Faced with that choice, I
will defend America every time.
Because we acted to defend our country, the murderous
regimes of Saddam Hussein and the Taliban are history, more than
50 million people have been liberated, and democracy is coming
to the broader Middle East. In Afghanistan, terrorists have done
everything they can to intimidate people — yet more than 10
million citizens have registered to vote in the October presidential
election — a resounding endorsement for democracy. Despite
————
265

ongoing acts of violence, Iraq now has a strong Prime Minister, a
national council, and national elections are scheduled for January.
Our nation is standing with the people of Afghanistan and Iraq,
because when America gives its word, America must keep its
word.
As importantly, we are serving a vital and historic cause that
will make our country safer. Free societies in the Middle East will
be hopeful societies, which no longer feed resentments and breed
violence for export. Free governments in the Middle East will fight
terrorists instead of harboring them, and that helps us keep the
peace. So our mission in Afghanistan and Iraq is clear: We will
help new leaders to train their armies, and move toward elections,
and get on the path of stability and democracy as quickly as
possible. And then our troops will return home with the honor they
have earned.
Our troops know the historic importance of our work. One
Army Specialist wrote home: “We are transforming a once sick
society into a hopeful place. The various terrorist enemies we are
facing in Iraq,” he continued, “are really aiming at you back in the
United States. This is a test of will for our country. We soldiers
of yours are doing great and scoring victories and confronting the
evil terrorists.”
That young man is right — our men and women in uniform
are doing a superb job for America. Tonight I want to speak to
all of them, and to their families: You are involved in a struggle
of historic proportion. Because of your service and sacrifice, we
are defeating the terrorists where they live and plan, and you’re
making America safer. Because of you, women in Afghanistan
are no longer shot in a sports stadium. Because of you, the people
of Iraq no longer fear being executed and left in mass graves.
Because of you, the world is more just and will be more peaceful.
We owe you our thanks, and we owe you something more. We will
give you all the resources, all the tools, and all the support you
need for victory.
Again, my opponent and I have different approaches. I
————
266

proposed, and the Congress overwhelmingly passed, $87 billion in
funding needed by our troops doing battle in Afghanistan and Iraq.
My opponent and his running mate voted against this money for
bullets, and fuel, and vehicles, and body armor.
When asked to explain his vote, the Senator said, “I actually
did vote for the 87 billion dollars before I voted against it.”
Then he said he was “proud” of that vote. Then, when pressed,
he said it was a “complicated” matter. There’s nothing complicated
about supporting our troops in combat.
Our allies also know the historic importance of our work.
About 40 nations stand beside us in Afghanistan, and some 30
in Iraq. And I deeply appreciate the courage and wise counsel of
leaders like Prime Minister Howard, and President Kwasniewski,
and Prime Minister Berlusconi — and, of course, Prime Minister
Tony Blair.
Again, my opponent takes a different approach. In the midst
of war, he has called American allies, quote, a “coalition of the
coerced and the bribed.” That would be nations like Great Britain,
Poland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Denmark, El Salvador,
Australia, and others — allies that deserve the respect of all
Americans, not the scorn of a politician. I respect every soldier,
from every country, who serves beside us in the hard work of
history. America is grateful, and America will not forget.
The people we have freed won’t forget either. Not long ago,
seven Iraqi men came to see me in the Oval Office. They had X’s
branded into their foreheads, and their right hands had been cut
off, by Saddam Hussein’s secret police, the sadistic punishment
for imaginary crimes. During our emotional visit one of the Iraqi
men used his new prosthetic hand to slowly write out, in Arabic,
a prayer for God to bless America. I am proud that our country
remains the hope of the oppressed, and the greatest force for good
on this earth.
Others understand the historic importance of our work. The
terrorists know. They know that a vibrant, successful democracy at
the heart of the Middle East will discredit their radical ideology of
————
267

hate. They know that men and women with hope and purpose and
dignity do not strap bombs on their bodies and kill the innocent.
The terrorists are fighting freedom with all their cunning and
cruelty because freedom is their greatest fear — and they should
be afraid, because freedom is on the march.
I believe in the transformational power of liberty: The wisest
use of American strength is to advance freedom. As the citizens of
Afghanistan and Iraq seize the moment, their example will send a
message of hope throughout a vital region. Palestinians will hear
the message that democracy and reform are within their reach,
and so is peace with our good friend, Israel. Young women across
the Middle East will hear the message that their day of equality
and justice is coming. Young men will hear the message that
national progress and dignity are found in liberty, not tyranny and
terror. Reformers, and political prisoners, and exiles will hear the
message that their dream of freedom cannot be denied forever. And
as freedom advances — heart by heart, and nation by nation —
America will be more secure and the world more peaceful.
America has done this kind of work before — and there
have always been doubters. In 1946, 18 months after the fall of
Berlin to Allied forces, a journalist wrote in the New York Times,
“Germany is — a land in an acute stage of economic, political and
moral crisis. [European] capitals are frightened. In every [military]
headquarters, one meets alarmed officials doing their utmost to deal
with the consequences of the occupation policy that they admit has
failed.” End quote. Maybe that same person is still around, writing
editorials. Fortunately, we had a resolute president named Truman,
who, with the American people, persevered, knowing that a new
democracy at the center of Europe would lead to stability and
peace. And because that generation of Americans held firm in the
cause of liberty, we live in a better and safer world today.
The progress we and our friends and allies seek in the broader
Middle East will not come easily, or all at once. Yet Americans,
of all people, should never be surprised by the power of liberty
to transform lives and nations. That power brought settlers on
————
268

perilous journeys, inspired colonies to rebellion, ended the sin of
slavery, and set our nation against the tyrannies of the 20th century.
We were honored to aid the rise of democracy in Germany and
Japan and Nicaragua and Central Europe and the Baltics — and
that noble story goes on. I believe that America is called to lead
the cause of freedom in a new century. I believe that millions in
the Middle East plead in silence for their liberty. I believe that
given the chance, they will embrace the most honorable form of
government ever devised by man. I believe all these things because
freedom is not America’s gift to the world, it is the almighty God’s
gift to every man and woman in this world.
This moment in the life of our country will be remembered.
Generations will know if we kept our faith and kept our word.
Generations will know if we seized this moment, and used it to
build a future of safety and peace. The freedom of many, and the
future security of our nation, now depend on us. And tonight, my
fellow Americans, I ask you to stand with me.
In the last four years, you and I have come to know each other.
Even when we don’t agree, at least you know what I believe and
where I stand. You may have noticed I have a few flaws, too.
People sometimes have to correct my English. I knew I had a
problem when Arnold Schwarzenegger started doing it. Some
folks look at me and see a certain swagger, which in Texas is called
“walking.” Now and then I come across as a little too blunt — and
for that we can all thank the white-haired lady sitting right up there.
One thing — one thing I have learned about the presidency is
that whatever shortcomings you have, people are going to notice
them, and whatever strengths you have, you’re going to need them.
These four years have brought moments I could not foresee and
will not forget. I’ve tried to comfort Americans who lost the most
on September the 11th — people who showed me a picture or
told me a story, so I would know how much was taken from them.
I’ve learned first-hand that ordering Americans into battle is the
hardest decision, even when it is right. I have returned the salute
of wounded soldiers, some with a very tough road ahead, who say
————
269

they were just doing their job. I’ve held the children of the fallen,
who are told their dad or mom is a hero, but would rather just have
their mom or dad.
I’ve met with the wives and husbands who have received a
folded flag, and said a final goodbye to a soldier they loved. I am
awed that so many have used those meetings to say that I’m in their
prayers and to offer encouragement to me. Where does strength like
that come from? How can people so burdened with sorrow also feel
such pride? It is because they know their loved one was last seen
doing good. Because they know that liberty was precious to the one
they lost. And in those military families, I have seen the character
of a great nation: decent, idealistic, and strong.
The world saw that spirit three miles from here, when the
people of this city faced peril together, and lifted a flag over
the ruins, and defied the enemy with their courage. My fellow
Americans, for as long as our country stands, people will look to
the resurrection of New York City and they will say: Here buildings
fell, here a nation rose.
We see America’s character in our military, which finds a
way or makes one. We see it in our veterans, who are supporting
military families in their days of worry. We see it in our young
people, who have found heroes once again. We see that character
in workers and entrepreneurs, who are renewing our economy with
their effort and optimism. And all of this has confirmed one belief
beyond doubt: Having come this far, our tested and confident nation
can achieve anything.
To everything we know there is a season — a time for sadness,
a time for struggle, a time for rebuilding. And now we have reached
a time for hope. This young century will be liberty’s century.
By promoting liberty abroad, we will build a safer world. By
encouraging liberty at home, we will build a more hopeful America.
Like generations before us, we have a calling from beyond the stars
to stand for freedom. This is the everlasting dream of America —
and tonight, in this place, that dream is
renewed. Now we go forward — grateful for our freedom, faithful
————
270

to our cause, and confident in the future of the greatest nation on
earth.
God bless you, and may God continue to bless our great
country.

Vice President Cheney, Mr. Chief Justice, President Carter,
President Bush, President Clinton, reverend clergy, distinguished
guests, fellow citizens:
On this day, prescribed by law and marked by ceremony, we
celebrate the durable wisdom of our Constitution, and recall the
deep commitments that unite our country. I am grateful for the
honor of this hour, mindful of the consequential times in which we
live, and determined to fulfill the oath that I have sworn and you
have witnessed.
At this second gathering, our duties are defined not by the
words I use, but by the history we have seen together. For a half
century, America defended our own freedom by standing watch on
distant borders. After the shipwreck of communism came years of
relative quiet, years of repose, years of sabbatical - and then there
came a day of fire.
We have seen our vulnerability - and we have seen its deepest
source. For as long as whole regions of the world simmer in
resentment and tyranny - prone to ideologies that feed hatred and
excuse murder - violence will gather, and multiply in destructive
power, and cross the most defended borders, and raise a mortal
threat. There is only one force of history that can break the reign of
hatred and resentment, and expose the pretensions of tyrants, and
reward the hopes of the decent and tolerant, and that is the force of
human freedom.
We are led, by events and common sense, to one conclusion:
The survival of liberty in our land increasingly depends on the
success of liberty in other lands. The best hope for peace in our
world is the expansion of freedom in all the world.
America’s vital interests and our deepest beliefs are now one.
————
273

From the day of our Founding, we have proclaimed that every man
and woman on this earth has rights, and dignity, and matchless
value, because they bear the image of the Maker of Heaven and
earth. Across the generations we have proclaimed the imperative
of self-government, because no one is fit to be a master, and no one
deserves to be a slave. Advancing these ideals is the mission that
created our Nation. It is the honorable achievement of our fathers.
Now it is the urgent requirement of our nation’s security, and the
calling of our time.
So it is the policy of the United States to seek and support the
growth of democratic movements and institutions in every nation
and culture, with the ultimate goal of ending tyranny in our world.
This is not primarily the task of arms, though we will defend
ourselves and our friends by force of arms when necessary.
Freedom, by its nature, must be chosen, and defended by citizens,
and sustained by the rule of law and the protection of minorities.
And when the soul of a nation finally speaks, the institutions that
arise may reflect customs and traditions very different from our
own. America will not impose our own style of government on the
unwilling. Our goal instead is to help others find their own voice,
attain their own freedom, and make their own way.
The great objective of ending tyranny is the concentrated work
of generations. The difficulty of the task is no excuse for avoiding
it. America’s influence is not unlimited, but fortunately for the
oppressed, America’s influence is considerable, and we will use it
confidently in freedom’s cause.
My most solemn duty is to protect this nation and its people
against further attacks and emerging threats. Some have unwisely
chosen to test America’s resolve, and have found it firm.
We will persistently clarify the choice before every ruler and
every nation: The moral choice between oppression, which is
always wrong, and freedom, which is eternally right. America will
not pretend that jailed dissidents prefer their chains, or that women
welcome humiliation and servitude, or that any human being
aspires to live at the mercy of bullies.
————
274

We will encourage reform in other governments by making
clear that success in our relations will require the decent treatment
of their own people. America’s belief in human dignity will guide
our policies, yet rights must be more than the grudging concessions
of dictators; they are secured by free dissent and the participation
of the governed. In the long run, there is no justice without
freedom, and there can be no human rights without human liberty.
Some, I know, have questioned the global appeal of liberty though this time in history, four decades defined by the swiftest
advance of freedom ever seen, is an odd time for doubt. Americans,
of all people, should never be surprised by the power of our ideals.
Eventually, the call of freedom comes to every mind and every
soul. We do not accept the existence of permanent tyranny because
we do not accept the possibility of permanent slavery. Liberty will
come to those who love it.
Today, America speaks anew to the peoples of the world:
All who live in tyranny and hopelessness can know: the United
States will not ignore your oppression, or excuse your oppressors.
When you stand for your liberty, we will stand with you.
Democratic reformers facing repression, prison, or exile can
know: America sees you for who you are: the future leaders of your
free country.
The rulers of outlaw regimes can know that we still believe as
Abraham Lincoln did: “Those who deny freedom to others deserve
it not for themselves; and, under the rule of a just God, cannot long
retain it.”
The leaders of governments with long habits of control need to
know: To serve your people you must learn to trust them. Start on
this journey of progress and justice, and America will walk at your
side.
And all the allies of the United States can know: we honor
your friendship, we rely on your counsel, and we depend on your
help. Division among free nations is a primary goal of freedom’s
enemies. The concerted effort of free nations to promote democracy
is a prelude to our enemies’ defeat.
————
275

Today, I also speak anew to my fellow citizens:
From all of you, I have asked patience in the hard task of
securing America, which you have granted in good measure. Our
country has accepted obligations that are difficult to fulfill, and
would be dishonorable to abandon. Yet because we have acted in
the great liberating tradition of this nation, tens of millions have
achieved their freedom. And as hope kindles hope, millions more
will find it. By our efforts, we have lit a fire as well - a fire in the
minds of men. It warms those who feel its power, it burns those
who fight its progress, and one day this untamed fire of freedom
will reach the darkest corners of our world.
A few Americans have accepted the hardest duties in this cause
- in the quiet work of intelligence and diplomacy ... the idealistic
work of helping raise up free governments ... the dangerous and
necessary work of fighting our enemies. Some have shown their
devotion to our country in deaths that honored their whole lives and we will always honor their names and their sacrifice.
All Americans have witnessed this idealism, and some for the
first time. I ask our youngest citizens to believe the evidence of
your eyes. You have seen duty and allegiance in the determined
faces of our soldiers. You have seen that life is fragile, and evil is
real, and courage triumphs. Make the choice to serve in a cause
larger than your wants, larger than yourself - and in your days you
will add not just to the wealth of our country, but to its character.
America has need of idealism and courage, because we have
essential work at home - the unfinished work of American freedom.
In a world moving toward liberty, we are determined to show the
meaning and promise of liberty.
In America’s ideal of freedom, citizens find the dignity and
security of economic independence, instead of laboring on the
edge of subsistence. This is the broader definition of liberty that
motivated the Homestead Act, the Social Security Act, and the G.I.
Bill of Rights. And now we will extend this vision by reforming
great institutions to serve the needs of our time. To give every
American a stake in the promise and future of our country, we will
————
276

bring the highest standards to our schools, and build an ownership
society. We will widen the ownership of homes and businesses,
retirement savings and health insurance - preparing our people for
the challenges of life in a free society. By making every citizen an
agent of his or her own destiny, we will give our fellow Americans
greater freedom from want and fear, and make our society more
prosperous and just and equal.
In America’s ideal of freedom, the public interest depends on
private character - on integrity, and tolerance toward others, and
the rule of conscience in our own lives. Self-government relies, in
the end, on the governing of the self. That edifice of character is
built in families, supported by communities with standards, and
sustained in our national life by the truths of Sinai, the Sermon
on the Mount, the words of the Koran, and the varied faiths of
our people. Americans move forward in every generation by
reaffirming all that is good and true that came before - ideals of
justice and conduct that are the same yesterday, today, and forever.
In America’s ideal of freedom, the exercise of rights is
ennobled by service, and mercy, and a heart for the weak. Liberty
for all does not mean independence from one another. Our nation
relies on men and women who look after a neighbor and surround
the lost with love. Americans, at our best, value the life we see in
one another, and must always remember that even the unwanted
have worth. And our country must abandon all the habits of racism,
because we cannot carry the message of freedom and the baggage
of bigotry at the same time.
From the perspective of a single day, including this day of
dedication, the issues and questions before our country are many.
From the viewpoint of centuries, the questions that come to us
are narrowed and few. Did our generation advance the cause of
freedom? And did our character bring credit to that cause?
These questions that judge us also unite us, because Americans
of every party and background, Americans by choice and by birth,
are bound to one another in the cause of freedom. We have known
divisions, which must be healed to move forward in great purposes
————
277

- and I will strive in good faith to heal them. Yet those divisions
do not define America. We felt the unity and fellowship of our
nation when freedom came under attack, and our response came
like a single hand over a single heart. And we can feel that same
unity and pride whenever America acts for good, and the victims
of disaster are given hope, and the unjust encounter justice, and the
captives are set free.
We go forward with complete confidence in the eventual
triumph of freedom. Not because history runs on the wheels of
inevitability; it is human choices that move events. Not because
we consider ourselves a chosen nation; God moves and chooses as
He wills. We have confidence because freedom is the permanent
hope of mankind, the hunger in dark places, the longing of the
soul. When our Founders declared a new order of the ages; when
soldiers died in wave upon wave for a union based on liberty; when
citizens marched in peaceful outrage under the banner “Freedom
Now” - they were acting on an ancient hope that is meant to be
fulfilled. History has an ebb and flow of justice, but history also has
a visible direction, set by liberty and the Author of Liberty.
When the Declaration of Independence was first read in public
and the Liberty Bell was sounded in celebration, a witness said, “It
rang as if it meant something.” In our time it means something still.
America, in this young century, proclaims liberty throughout all the
world, and to all the inhabitants thereof. Renewed in our strength tested, but not weary - we are ready for the greatest achievements
in the history of freedom.
May God bless you, and may He watch over the United States
of America.

Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, members of Congress,
fellow citizens:
As a new Congress gathers, all of us in the elected branches
of government share a great privilege: We’ve been placed in
office by the votes of the people we serve. And tonight that is a
privilege we share with newly-elected leaders of Afghanistan, the
Palestinian Territories, Ukraine, and a free and sovereign Iraq.
Two weeks ago, I stood on the steps of this Capitol and
renewed the commitment of our nation to the guiding ideal of
liberty for all. This evening I will set forth policies to advance that
ideal at home and around the world.
Tonight, with a healthy, growing economy, with more
Americans going back to work, with our nation an active force for
good in the world — the state of our union is confident and strong.
Our generation has been blessed — by the expansion of
opportunity, by advances in medicine, by the security purchased
by our parents’ sacrifice. Now, as we see a little gray in the mirror
— or a lot of gray — and we watch our children moving into
adulthood, we ask the question: What will be the state of their
union? Members of Congress, the choices we make together will
answer that question. Over the next several months, on issue after
issue, let us do what Americans have always done, and build a
better world for our children and our grandchildren.
First, we must be good stewards of this economy, and renew
the great institutions on which millions of our fellow citizens
rely. America’s economy is the fastest growing of any major
industrialized nation. In the past four years, we provided tax relief
to every person who pays income taxes, overcome a recession,
opened up new markets abroad, prosecuted corporate criminals,
————
279

raised homeownership to its highest level in history, and in the
last year alone, the United States has added 2.3 million new jobs.
When action was needed, the Congress delivered — and the nation
is grateful.
Now we must add to these achievements. By making our
economy more flexible, more innovative, and more competitive,
we will keep America the economic leader of the world.
America’s prosperity requires restraining the spending appetite
of the federal government. I welcome the bipartisan enthusiasm
for spending discipline. I will send you a budget that holds the
growth of discretionary spending below inflation, makes tax
relief permanent, and stays on track to cut the deficit in half by
2009. My budget substantially reduces or eliminates more than
150 government programs that are not getting results, or duplicate
current efforts, or do not fulfill essential priorities. The principle
here is clear: Taxpayer dollars must be spent wisely, or not at all.
To make our economy stronger and more dynamic, we must
prepare a rising generation to fill the jobs of the 21st century. Under
the No Child Left Behind Act, standards are higher, test scores are
on the rise, and we’re closing the achievement gap for minority
students. Now we must demand better results from our high
schools, so every high school diploma is a ticket to success. We
will help an additional 200,000 workers to get training for a better
career, by reforming our job training system and strengthening
America’s community colleges. And we’ll make it easier for
Americans to afford a college education, by increasing the size of
Pell Grants.
To make our economy stronger and more competitive, America
must reward, not punish, the efforts and dreams of entrepreneurs.
Small business is the path of advancement, especially for women
and minorities, so we must free small businesses from needless
regulation and protect honest job-creators from junk lawsuits.
Justice is distorted, and our economy is held back by irresponsible
class-actions and frivolous asbestos claims — and I urge Congress
to pass legal reforms this year.
————
280

To make our economy stronger and more productive, we must
make health care more affordable, and give families greater access
to good coverage and more control over their health decisions. I
ask Congress to move forward on a comprehensive health care
agenda with tax credits to help low-income workers buy insurance,
a community health center in every poor county, improved
information technology to prevent medical error and needless
costs, association health plans for small businesses and their
employees expanded health savings accounts and medical liability
reform that will reduce health care costs and make sure patients
have the doctors and care they need.
To keep our economy growing, we also need reliable supplies
of affordable, environmentally responsible energy. Nearly four
years ago, I submitted a comprehensive energy strategy that
encourages conservation, alternative sources, a modernized
electricity grid, and more production here at home — including
safe, clean nuclear energy. My Clear Skies legislation will cut
power plant pollution and improve the health of our citizens. And
my budget provides strong funding for leading-edge technology
— from hydrogen-fueled cars, to clean coal, to renewable sources
such as ethanol. Four years of debate is enough: I urge Congress
to pass legislation that makes America more secure and less
dependent on foreign energy.
All these proposals are essential to expand this economy
and add new jobs — but they are just the beginning of our duty.
To build the prosperity of future generations, we must update
institutions that were created to meet the needs of an earlier time.
Year after year, Americans are burdened by an archaic, incoherent
federal tax code. I’ve appointed a bipartisan panel to examine the
tax code from top to bottom. And when their recommendations are
delivered, you and I will work together to give this nation a tax
code that is pro-growth, easy to understand, and fair to all.
America’s immigration system is also outdated — unsuited
to the needs of our economy and to the values of our country. We
should not be content with laws that punish hardworking people
————
281

who want only to provide for their families, and deny businesses
willing workers, and invite chaos at our border. It is time for an
immigration policy that permits temporary guest workers to fill jobs
Americans will not take, that rejects amnesty, that tells us who is
entering and leaving our country, and that closes the border to drug
dealers and terrorists.
One of America’s most important institutions — a symbol
of the trust between generations — is also in need of wise and
effective reform. Social Security was a great moral success of the
20th century, and we must honor its great purposes in this new
century. The system, however, on its current path, is headed toward
bankruptcy. And so we must join together to strengthen and save
Social Security.
Today, more than 45 million Americans receive Social Security
benefits, and millions more are nearing retirement — and for them
the system is sound and fiscally strong. I have a message for every
American who is 55 or older: Do not let anyone mislead you; for
you, the Social Security system will not change in any way. For
younger workers, the Social Security system has serious problems
that will grow worse with time. Social Security was created decades
ago, for a very different era. In those days, people did not live as
long. Benefits were much lower than they are today. And a halfcentury ago, about sixteen workers paid into the system for each
person drawing benefits.
Our society has changed in ways the founders of Social Security
could not have foreseen. In today’s world, people are living longer
and, therefore, drawing benefits longer. And those benefits are
scheduled to rise dramatically over the next few decades. And
instead of sixteen workers paying in for every beneficiary, right
now it’s only about three workers. And over the next few decades
that number will fall to just two workers per beneficiary. With each
passing year, fewer workers are paying ever-higher benefits to an
ever-larger number of retirees.
So here is the result: Thirteen years from now, in 2018, Social
Security will be paying out more than it takes in. And every year
————
282

afterward will bring a new shortfall, bigger than the year before.
For example, in the year 2027, the government will somehow have
to come up with an extra $200 billion to keep the system afloat
— and by 2033, the annual shortfall would be more than $300
billion. By the year 2042, the entire system would be exhausted
and bankrupt. If steps are not taken to avert that outcome, the
only solutions would be dramatically higher taxes, massive new
borrowing, or sudden and severe cuts in Social Security benefits or
other government programs.
I recognize that 2018 and 2042 may seem a long way off. But
those dates are not so distant, as any parent will tell you. If you
have a five-year-old, you’re already concerned about how you’ll
pay for college tuition 13 years down the road. If you’ve got
children in their 20s, as some of us do, the idea of Social Security
collapsing before they retire does not seem like a small matter. And
it should not be a small matter to the United States Congress. You
and I share a responsibility. We must pass reforms that solve the
financial problems of Social Security once and for all.
Fixing Social Security permanently will require an open,
candid review of the options. Some have suggested limiting
benefits for wealthy retirees. Former Congressman Tim Penny
has raised the possibility of indexing benefits to prices rather than
wages. During the 1990s, my predecessor, President Clinton, spoke
of increasing the retirement age. Former Senator John Breaux
suggested discouraging early collection of Social Security benefits.
The late Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan recommended changing
the way benefits are calculated. All these ideas are on the table.
I know that none of these reforms would be easy. But we have
to move ahead with courage and honesty, because our children’s
retirement security is more important than partisan politics. I
will work with members of Congress to find the most effective
combination of reforms. I will listen to anyone who has a good idea
to offer. We must, however, be guided by some basic principles.
We must make Social Security permanently sound, not leave that
task for another day. We must not jeopardize our economic strength
————
283

by increasing payroll taxes. We must ensure that lower-income
Americans get the help they need to have dignity and peace of
mind in their retirement. We must guarantee there is no change for
those now retired or nearing retirement. And we must take care
that any changes in the system are gradual, so younger workers
have years to prepare and plan for their future.
As we fix Social Security, we also have the responsibility to
make the system a better deal for younger workers. And the best
way to reach that goal is through voluntary personal retirement
accounts. Here is how the idea works. Right now, a set portion of
the money you earn is taken out of your paycheck to pay for the
Social Security benefits of today’s retirees. If you’re a younger
worker, I believe you should be able to set aside part of that
money in your own retirement account, so you can build a nest
egg for your own future.
Here’s why the personal accounts are a better deal. Your
money will grow, over time, at a greater rate than anything the
current system can deliver — and your account will provide
money for retirement over and above the check you will receive
from Social Security. In addition, you’ll be able to pass along the
money that accumulates in your personal account, if you wish, to
your children and — or grandchildren. And best of all, the money
in the account is yours, and the government can never take it away.
The goal here is greater security in retirement, so we will set
careful guidelines for personal accounts. We’ll make sure the
money can only go into a conservative mix of bonds and stock
funds. We’ll make sure that your earnings are not eaten up by
hidden Wall Street fees. We’ll make sure there are good options
to protect your investments from sudden market swings on the
eve of your retirement. We’ll make sure a personal account
cannot be emptied out all at once, but rather paid out over time,
as an addition to traditional Social Security benefits. And we’ll
make sure this plan is fiscally responsible, by starting personal
retirement accounts gradually, and raising the yearly limits on
contributions over time, eventually permitting all workers to set
————
284

aside four percentage points of their payroll taxes in their accounts.
Personal retirement accounts should be familiar to federal
employees, because you already have something similar, called
the Thrift Savings Plan, which lets workers deposit a portion of
their paychecks into any of five different broadly-based investment
funds. It’s time to extend the same security, and choice, and
ownership to young Americans.
Our second great responsibility to our children and
grandchildren is to honor and to pass along the values that sustain a
free society. So many of my generation, after a long journey, have
come home to family and faith, and are determined to bring up
responsible, moral children. Government is not the source of these
values, but government should never undermine them.
Because marriage is a sacred institution and the foundation
of society, it should not be re-defined by activist judges. For the
good of families, children, and society, I support a constitutional
amendment to protect the institution of marriage.
Because a society is measured by how it treats the weak and
vulnerable, we must strive to build a culture of life. Medical
research can help us reach that goal, by developing treatments and
cures that save lives and help people overcome disabilities — and
I thank the Congress for doubling the funding of the National
Institutes of Health. To build a culture of life, we must also ensure
that scientific advances always serve human dignity, not take
advantage of some lives for the benefit of others. We should all be
able to agree on some clear standards. I will work with Congress
to ensure that human embryos are not created for experimentation
or grown for body parts, and that human life is never bought and
sold as a commodity. America will continue to lead the world in
medical research that is ambitious, aggressive, and always ethical.
Because courts must always deliver impartial justice, judges
have a duty to faithfully interpret the law, not legislate from the
bench. As President, I have a constitutional responsibility to
nominate men and women who understand the role of courts in
our democracy, and are well-qualified to serve on the bench —
————
285

and I have done so. The Constitution also gives the Senate a
responsibility: Every judicial nominee deserves an up or down
vote.
Because one of the deepest values of our country is
compassion, we must never turn away from any citizen who feels
isolated from the opportunities of America. Our government will
continue to support faith-based and community groups that bring
hope to harsh places. Now we need to focus on giving young
people, especially young men in our cities, better options than
apathy, or gangs, or jail. Tonight I propose a three-year initiative
to help organizations keep young people out of gangs, and show
young men an ideal of manhood that respects women and rejects
violence. Taking on gang life will be one part of a broader
outreach to at-risk youth, which involves parents and pastors,
coaches and community leaders, in programs ranging from literacy
to sports. And I am proud that the leader of this nationwide effort
will be our First Lady, Laura Bush.
Because HIV/AIDS brings suffering and fear into so many
lives, I ask you to reauthorize the Ryan White Act to encourage
prevention, and provide care and treatment to the victims of that
disease. And as we update this important law, we must focus
our efforts on fellow citizens with the highest rates of new cases,
African American men and women.
Because one of the main sources of our national unity is
our belief in equal justice, we need to make sure Americans of
all races and backgrounds have confidence in the system that
provides justice. In America we must make doubly sure no person
is held to account for a crime he or she did not commit — so we
are dramatically expanding the use of DNA evidence to prevent
wrongful conviction. Soon I will send to Congress a proposal to
fund special training for defense counsel in capital cases, because
people on trial for their lives must have competent lawyers by their
side.
Our third responsibility to future generations is to leave them
an America that is safe from danger, and protected by peace. We
————
286

will pass along to our children all the freedoms we enjoy — and
chief among them is freedom from fear.
In the three and a half years since September the 11th, 2001,
we have taken unprecedented actions to protect Americans. We’ve
created a new department of government to defend our homeland,
focused the FBI on preventing terrorism, begun to reform our
intelligence agencies, broken up terror cells across the country,
expanded research on defenses against biological and chemical
attack, improved border security, and trained more than a halfmillion first responders. Police and firefighters, air marshals,
researchers, and so many others are working every day to make our
homeland safer, and we thank them all.
Our nation, working with allies and friends, has also confronted
the enemy abroad, with measures that are determined, successful,
and continuing. The al Qaeda terror network that attacked our
country still has leaders — but many of its top commanders have
been removed. There are still governments that sponsor and harbor
terrorists — but their number has declined. There are still regimes
seeking weapons of mass destruction — but no longer without
attention and without consequence. Our country is still the target
of terrorists who want to kill many, and intimidate us all — and we
will stay on the offensive against them, until the fight is won.
Pursuing our enemies is a vital commitment of the war on
terror — and I thank the Congress for providing our servicemen
and women with the resources they have needed. During this time
of war, we must continue to support our military and give them the
tools for victory.
Other nations around the globe have stood with us. In
Afghanistan, an international force is helping provide security. In
Iraq, 28 countries have troops on the ground, the United Nations
and the European Union provided technical assistance for the
elections, and NATO is leading a mission to help train Iraqi officers.
We’re cooperating with 60 governments in the Proliferation
Security Initiative, to detect and stop the transit of dangerous
materials. We’re working closely with the governments in Asia to
————
287

convince North Korea to abandon its nuclear ambitions. Pakistan,
Saudi Arabia, and nine other countries have captured or detained
al Qaeda terrorists. In the next four years, my administration will
continue to build the coalitions that will defeat the dangers of our
time.
In the long-term, the peace we seek will only be achieved by
eliminating the conditions that feed radicalism and ideologies of
murder. If whole regions of the world remain in despair and grow
in hatred, they will be the recruiting grounds for terror, and that
terror will stalk America and other free nations for decades. The
only force powerful enough to stop the rise of tyranny and terror,
and replace hatred with hope, is the force of human freedom. Our
enemies know this, and that is why the terrorist Zarqawi recently
declared war on what he called the “evil principle” of democracy.
And we’ve declared our own intention: America will stand with the
allies of freedom to support democratic movements in the Middle
East and beyond, with the ultimate goal of ending tyranny in our
world.
The United States has no right, no desire, and no intention to
impose our form of government on anyone else. That is one of the
main differences between us and our enemies. They seek to impose
and expand an empire of oppression, in which a tiny group of
brutal, self-appointed rulers control every aspect of every life. Our
aim is to build and preserve a community of free and independent
nations, with governments that answer to their citizens, and reflect
their own cultures. And because democracies respect their own
people and their neighbors, the advance of freedom will lead to
peace.
That advance has great momentum in our time — shown by
women voting in Afghanistan, and Palestinians choosing a new
direction, and the people of Ukraine asserting their democratic
rights and electing a president. We are witnessing landmark events
in the history of liberty. And in the coming years, we will add to
that story.
The beginnings of reform and democracy in the Palestinian
————
288

territories are now showing the power of freedom to break old
patterns of violence and failure. Tomorrow morning, Secretary
of State Rice departs on a trip that will take her to Israel and the
West Bank for meetings with Prime Minister Sharon and President
Abbas. She will discuss with them how we and our friends can
help the Palestinian people end terror and build the institutions
of a peaceful, independent, democratic state. To promote this
democracy, I will ask Congress for $350 million to support
Palestinian political, economic, and security reforms. The goal of
two democratic states, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace, is within reach — and America will help them achieve that
goal.
To promote peace and stability in the broader Middle East, the
United States will work with our friends in the region to fight the
common threat of terror, while we encourage a higher standard
of freedom. Hopeful reform is already taking hold in an arc from
Morocco to Jordan to Bahrain. The government of Saudi Arabia
can demonstrate its leadership in the region by expanding the
role of its people in determining their future. And the great and
proud nation of Egypt, which showed the way toward peace in
the Middle East, can now show the way toward democracy in the
Middle East.
To promote peace in the broader Middle East, we must
confront regimes that continue to harbor terrorists and pursue
weapons of mass murder. Syria still allows its territory, and
parts of Lebanon, to be used by terrorists who seek to destroy
every chance of peace in the region. You have passed, and we
are applying, the Syrian Accountability Act — and we expect
the Syrian government to end all support for terror and open the
door to freedom. Today, Iran remains the world’s primary state
sponsor of terror — pursuing nuclear weapons while depriving
its people of the freedom they seek and deserve. We are working
with European allies to make clear to the Iranian regime that it
must give up its uranium enrichment program and any plutonium
reprocessing, and end its support for terror. And to the Iranian
————
289

people, I say tonight: As you stand for your own liberty, America
stands with you.
Our generational commitment to the advance of freedom,
especially in the Middle East, is now being tested and honored
in Iraq. That country is a vital front in the war on terror, which is
why the terrorists have chosen to make a stand there. Our men and
women in uniform are fighting terrorists in Iraq, so we do not have
to face them here at home. And the victory of freedom in Iraq
will strengthen a new ally in the war on terror, inspire democratic
reformers from Damascus to Tehran, bring more hope and progress
to a troubled region, and thereby lift a terrible threat from the lives
of our children and grandchildren.
We will succeed because the Iraqi people value their own
liberty — as they showed the world last Sunday. Across Iraq, often
at great risk, millions of citizens went to the polls and elected 275
men and women to represent them in a new Transitional National
Assembly. A young woman in Baghdad told of waking to the sound
of mortar fire on election day, and wondering if it might be too
dangerous to vote. She said, “Hearing those explosions, it occurred
to me — the insurgents are weak, they are afraid of democracy,
they are losing. So I got my husband, and I got my parents, and we
all came out and voted together.”
Americans recognize that spirit of liberty, because we share it.
In any nation, casting your vote is an act of civic responsibility; for
millions of Iraqis, it was also an act of personal courage, and they
have earned the respect of us all.
One of Iraq’s leading democracy and human rights advocates
is Safia Taleb al-Suhail. She says of her country, “We were
occupied for 35 years by Saddam Hussein. That was the real
occupation. Thank you to the American people who paid the cost,
but most of all, to the soldiers.” Eleven years ago, Safia’s father
was assassinated by Saddam’s intelligence service. Three days ago
in Baghdad, Safia was finally able to vote for the leaders of her
country — and we are honored that she is with us tonight.
The terrorists and insurgents are violently opposed to
————
290

democracy, and will continue to attack it. Yet, the terrorists’ most
powerful myth is being destroyed. The whole world is seeing
that the car bombers and assassins are not only fighting coalition
forces, they are trying to destroy the hopes of Iraqis, expressed in
free elections. And the whole world now knows that a small group
of extremists will not overturn the will of the Iraqi people.
We will succeed in Iraq because Iraqis are determined to fight
for their own freedom, and to write their own history. As Prime
Minister Allawi said in his speech to Congress last September,
“Ordinary Iraqis are anxious to shoulder all the security burdens
of our country as quickly as possible.” That is the natural desire
of an independent nation, and it is also the stated mission of our
coalition in Iraq. The new political situation in Iraq opens a new
phase of our work in that country.
At the recommendation of our commanders on the ground,
and in consultation with the Iraqi government, we will increasingly
focus our efforts on helping prepare more capable Iraqi security
forces — forces with skilled officers and an effective command
structure. As those forces become more self-reliant and take on
greater security responsibilities, America and its coalition partners
will increasingly be in a supporting role. In the end, Iraqis must be
able to defend their own country — and we will help that proud,
new nation secure its liberty.
Recently an Iraqi interpreter said to a reporter, “Tell America
not to abandon us.” He and all Iraqis can be certain: While our
military strategy is adapting to circumstances, our commitment
remains firm and unchanging. We are standing for the freedom of
our Iraqi friends, and freedom in Iraq will make America safer
for generations to come. We will not set an artificial timetable for
leaving Iraq, because that would embolden the terrorists and make
them believe they can wait us out. We are in Iraq to achieve a
result: A country that is democratic, representative of all its people,
at peace with its neighbors, and able to defend itself. And when
that result is achieved, our men and women serving in Iraq will
return home with the honor they have earned.
————
291

Right now, Americans in uniform are serving at posts across
the world, often taking great risks on my orders. We have given
them training and equipment; and they have given us an example
of idealism and character that makes every American proud. The
volunteers of our military are unrelenting in battle, unwavering in
loyalty, unmatched in honor and decency, and every day they’re
making our nation more secure. Some of our servicemen and
women have survived terrible injuries, and this grateful country
will do everything we can to help them recover. And we have said
farewell to some very good men and women, who died for our
freedom, and whose memory this nation will honor forever.
One name we honor is Marine Corps Sergeant Byron
Norwood of Pflugerville, Texas, who was killed during the assault
on Fallujah. His mom, Janet, sent me a letter and told me how
much Byron loved being a Marine, and how proud he was to be on
the front line against terror. She wrote, “When Byron was home
the last time, I said that I wanted to protect him like I had since
he was born. He just hugged me and said, ‘You’ve done your job,
Mom. Now it is my turn to protect you.’” Ladies and gentlemen,
with grateful hearts, we honor freedom’s defenders, and our
military families, represented here this evening by Sergeant
Norwood’s mom and dad, Janet and Bill Norwood.
In these four years, Americans have seen the unfolding
of large events. We have known times of sorrow, and hours of
uncertainty, and days of victory. In all this history, even when we
have disagreed, we have seen threads of purpose that unite us. The
attack on freedom in our world has reaffirmed our confidence in
freedom’s power to change the world. We are all part of a great
venture: To extend the promise of freedom in our country, to
renew the values that sustain our liberty, and to spread the peace
that freedom brings.
As Franklin Roosevelt once reminded Americans, “Each
age is a dream that is dying, or one that is coming to birth.” And
we live in the country where the biggest dreams are born. The
abolition of slavery was only a dream — until it was fulfilled.
————
292

The liberation of Europe from fascism was only a dream — until it
was achieved. The fall of imperial communism was only a dream
— until, one day, it was accomplished. Our generation has dreams
of its own, and we also go forward with confidence. The road of
Providence is uneven and unpredictable — yet we know where it
leads: It leads to freedom.
Thank you, and may God bless America.

Thank you all very much. Mr. Speaker, thank you for that
kind and short introduction. I appreciate Governor Sanford being
here. I want to thank the Lt. Governor. I appreciate President Pro
Tem McConnell, Majority Leader Leatherman, members of the
South Carolina legislature. I appreciate my traveling party from
Washington. Hope you appreciate them, too. That would be Senator
Lindsey Graham, Senator DeMint, members of the United States
House of Representatives from the great state of South Carolina. I
appreciate the justices of the South Carolina Supreme Court being
here. I thank those of you who have taken time to come and listen. I
appreciate your warm welcome.
It is an honor to be speaking in this chamber. It is great to be
back in the capital of South Carolina. The last time I came to this
city I gave the commencement speech at USC. I was proud to have
received an honorary degree. When I told Laura about it, she said,
“I thought your first degree was honorary.” She sends her best and
she sends her love. She’s, by the way, a fabulous First Lady.
I appreciate our escort committee. I told the members that this
is the first time I have spoken to a legislative body, state legislative
body since I was the governor of Texas. So thank you for having
me. It’s — there’s some differences, of course. There are a lot of
cowboy hats back in Austin. And I’ll be honest with you, a lot of
us didn’t know anything about dancing the shag. And I imagine we
could have a pretty good debate about which of our states has the
best barbecue. Now is not the time.
But one thing is, no matter whether you serve at the federal
level or the state level, we share serious responsibilities. See, our
constituents have put us into office to solve problems now. That’s
what they’ve done. They said, we’ve elected you to go to your
————
295

statehouse, or in my case, Washington, D.C., to solve problems. The
people expect us to confront problems without illusion. They expect
us to lead with conviction and confidence, not by reading the latest
poll or listening to the latest focus group. And above all, they expect
us to deliver results.
And here in South Carolina, you’ve delivered results. You’ve
faced serious challenges, especially in your economy. Listen, we’ve
had a stock market decline, we’ve had a recession, we’ve had
corporate scandals, we had a terrorist attack on September the 11th,
2001, we’ve had the demands of war. And all these have tested our
nation’s economy. And they hit particularly hard here in your state.
South Carolina’s economic growth slowed; small businesses moved
out or shut down; workers lost their jobs; and state finances were
headed toward a free fall.
The people of South Carolina look to you and they look to
your Governor for leadership. And you delivered. You set clear
priorities for your budget, and you made hard decisions when it
came to spending. To rein in the rising costs of health care, you
became one of the first states in the nation to offer health savings
accounts to state employees. To reward hardworking families and
job creators, you refused to raise taxes on the working people of
South Carolina. You focused bipartisan actions; you’ve lifted your
state out of fiscal crisis; you’ve erased a $155 million deficit, and
you’ve done it two years ahead of schedule. Today South Carolina
families are planning for the future with confidence.
I found this to be an interesting statistic about your state: More
than 76 percent of the people in your state own their own home,
one of the highest rates in the United States. Small businesses are
investing and expanding, exports are on the rise. Thanks to your
leadership, thanks to your hard work, thanks to your willingness to
set aside partisan differences, jobs are coming back to the great state
of South Carolina.
In Washington, we’re moving forward with an ambitious agenda
to keep this country safe, prosperous and free. The war on terror
goes on. There are still ruthless enemies that would like to do harm
————
296

to our people. We will continue to keep the pressure on these folks.
We’ll work with our friends and allies to be unrelenting in our
search to bring them to justice. We will not rest until America is
safe.
We’ll continue to work to improve security here at home, but
in the long-term, in the long run, the best way to protect America
and to keep the peace is to change the conditions that give rise
to hopelessness and extremism. And the best way to do that is to
spread freedom around the world.
I don’t believe freedom is America’s gift to the world. I believe
freedom is the Almighty God’s gift to each man and woman in
this world. My administration will continue to pursue pro-growth
policies to ensure that America is the best place in the world to do
business. To keep the economy growing and create jobs, we will
keep the taxes low. We’ll continue to confront the problems of junk
lawsuits by pushing for meaningful asbestos and medical liability
reform. We’ll work with Congress to pass an energy bill that will
make America less dependent on foreign sources of energy.
I sent to Congress a disciplined federal budget, and both the
House and the Senate have passed budget resolutions. And now
they need to work out their differences and send me a budget that
meets America’s priorities, that restrains federal spending, and that
keeps us on track to cut the deficit in half by 2009. In Washington,
and in Columbia, South Carolina, government needs to follow a
straightforward principle, a taxpayer’s dollar must be spent wisely,
or not spent at all.
Strong leadership means rising to the challenges of the day.
It also means looking down the road. There will always be
problems that arise unexpectedly; yet problems — some problems
are completely predictable. And as leaders, you and I have a
responsibility to confront those problems today, and not pass them
on to future generations.
Over the past few weeks I’ve been traveling around the
country talking about one of the most serious and most predictable
challenges which face our nation, and that is the long-term fiscal
————
297

health of Social Security. Social Security has been a great success.
Franklin Roosevelt did a really smart thing in setting up the
Social Security system. It has provided an important safety net
for millions of Americans. Seniors in South Carolina and seniors
across this country depend on their monthly checks as an important
part of their lives, as an important source of income for their
retirement.
And today I have a message for every senior in South Carolina,
and every senior across this country: Do not pay attention to the
propaganda and scare ads. If you’re receiving a Social Security
check this month, you will continue receiving a Social Security
next month, and the month after that, and every month for the rest
of your life.
There are other Americans who are now approaching
retirement and have been paying into Social Security throughout
their lives. These workers are counting on Social Security as part
of their retirement plans, and there’s money in the system for them.
If you were born prior to 1950, America will honor the promise
of Social Security for you. The problem is that the government is
making promises for younger Americans that it cannot pay for. In
other words, there’s a hole in the safety net for younger Americans.
See, Social Security is a pay-as-you-go system — you pay and
we go ahead and spend here in Washington. We spend on — to
provide benefits for current retirees, and with money left over,
we have spent your payroll taxes on government programs. Some
people think there’s a Social Security trust, where the government
is holding your money, in an account with your name on it. It just
doesn’t work that way. That’s not the way the system works. There
is no vault holding your cash, waiting for you to retire. Instead,
because we spend Social Security taxes on current retirees and
other government programs, all that is left over in the so-called
security trust is a bunch of filing cabinets with IOUs in them.
As a matter of fact, I went to West Virginia the other day to
look at the filing cabinets, to make sure the IOUs were there —
paper. And it’s there. And it’s, frankly, not a very encouraging
————
298

sight. It’s not encouraging especially when you consider that
times are changing in America, that the math for Social Security
is changing significantly. By the math I mean this: In 1950, there
were about 16 workers paying taxes for every beneficiary — 16
workers for beneficiary. And today, there’s 3.3 workers for every
beneficiary. By the time our children and grandchildren are ready
to retire, there will only be 2 workers paying for every beneficiary
in the system.
That’s only part of the problem. To compound the problem,
the first baby boomers will soon start retiring. I happen to be
one of them. As a matter of fact, I’m eligible to start collecting
benefits in 2008 — which happens to be a convenient year for
me. The retirement of the baby boomer generation is going to
have a huge impact on Social Security, because my generation is
about 50-percent larger than my parents’ generation. Today there
are about 40 million retirees receiving benefits. By the time all
the baby boomers have retired, there will be more than 72 million
retirees receiving benefits. And thanks to advances in modern
medicine, these retirees will live longer and collect benefits over
longer retirements than the previous generation.
And to compound the problem even further, Congress has
ensured that benefits to my generation will grow faster than our
economy or the rate of inflation. In other words, people went
around the country saying, vote for me, I’ll make sure your benefits
are higher. And so this sets up an enormous fiscal challenge
facing Social Security. With each passing year, there will be fewer
workers paying ever higher benefits to a larger number of retirees
who are living longer.
And so here’s the result: Three years from now, when the first
baby boomers start collecting Social Security benefits, the system
will start heading toward the red. Less than a decade later, in 2017,
Social Security will go negative. And by that I mean it will be
paying out more in benefits than it collects in payroll taxes. More
money going out than coming in. And every year after that the
shortfall will get worse.
————
299

In the year 2027, the government will somehow have to come
up with an extra $200 billion to fund the system — $200 billion
more going out than coming in through payroll taxes. In 2034, the
annual shortfall will be more than $300 billion a year. And by the
year 2041, the entire system will be bankrupt. Now, think about
that. If we don’t do something to fix the system now, the students
graduating this spring from the University of South Carolina, or, in
deference to the Speaker, Clemson will spend their entire careers
paying Social Security taxes only to see the system go bankrupt a
few years before they retire.
And I don’t care if you’re a Republican or Democrat, these are
the facts. And the question is, do we have the will to do something
about them. Now, in South Carolina, you know that once you’re
in the red, the options of getting out are never very appealing. If
we allow Social Security to continue on its current path toward
bankruptcy, we will leave our children and grandchildren with only
a few drastic options to keep the system afloat. In other words, the
longer you wait, the longer we don’t do anything in Washington,
the more drastic the solutions become.
For example, some estimate if we don’t do anything, the
payroll tax will get up to 18 percent. Is that a legacy we want to
leave on younger generations of Americans? I don’t think so. Or
we’re going to have to dramatically slash benefits, or cut other
federal programs. The Social Security trust reported this: They
said, every year we wait to fix the system will add an additional
$600 billion to the cost of reform.
I understand why some in Washington don’t want to take
on this issue. I guess they calculate there’s a political cost when
dealing with a tough issue. I think there’s a political cost for not
dealing with the issue. And so I’ve been traveling this country
of ours, making it absolutely clear what the problems are. See,
my strategy is pretty simple: Take the message to the people and
define the facts of the problem, and let the people draw their own
conclusions. I’ve been to 22 states to explain the facts. I’ve been
to those states to explain the urgent need for the United States
————
300

Congress to work with the administration to get something done
now. And more and more Americans are beginning to hear the
message.
I’m just starting, I’m just warming up. As a matter of fact, I
like getting out of Washington, D.C. I like coming to places like
South Carolina, to put the facts on the table so the people can make
their own mind about what’s happening in Social Security.
I don’t know if you’ve ever heard of Dutch Fork High School
in Irmo. I met a very innovative teacher who assigned her students
this assignment: Why don’t you write letters to the editor about
their impressions of Social Security? Here’s what one of her
students wrote: “By the time my generation gets to the age to
draw Social Security, there will be no money left for us to draw
on.” This is a young high school student writing that. This isn’t a
professor in economics. This is a high school student. He said, “I
don’t know about other people, but I don’t like the sound of that.”
People are beginning to get the message that there is a problem in
Social Security.
Today I met an 80-year-old — 80-year-old young woman from
Silverstreet named Shirley. She said she’s counting on Social
Security. She gets a Social Security check every month, and she’s
confident she’ll keep getting her checks. And there’s no doubt in
her mind she’s going to get her checks, but there’s a doubt in her
mind as to whether or not her granddaughters are going to have
comfort in their retirement, whether or not the safety net will be
there for them. Here’s what she said: She said, “I don’t know what
I would do without it. It’s my granddaughters that I’m worried
about, and I want to do whatever is possible to fix the system for
them.”
Folks, we’re talking about a generational issue here in
America. The grandfolks are going to get their checks, and the
fundamental question is, do we have the will in Washington, D.C.
to make sure the system works for the grandchildren of America.
And that’s what I’m here talking about.
I believe I have a duty to ask people to bring ideas forward.
————
301

I brought a few myself, and I appreciate the response of Senator
Lindsey Graham. He’s brought some ideas forward, as has Senator
Jim DeMint, as has your Governor. These men have been leaders
in the debate. They’ve stepped up, and said, here are some ideas
I’d like you to consider. But they’re not the only ones who have set
up good ideas. Former Congressman Tim Penny, a Democrat from
Minnesota, has suggested tying Social Security benefits to prices
rather than wages. My predecessor, Bill Clinton, had time — had
meetings all around the country on Social Security and he spoke of
increasing the retirement age at one time.
I put together a commission of Republicans and Democrats,
headed by the late Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York.
And they did fine work. They recommended changing the way
benefits are calculated. In other words, people are putting ideas
on the table. An interesting idea was put forward by a Democrat
Social Security expert named Robert Pozen, who has proposed a
progressive way of structuring benefits that will be more generous
to low-income workers. And that’s an important idea.
In other words, all these ideas are on the table, but they have
one thing in common — they all require us to act now. Saving
Social Security is not a Republican goal, it is not a Democrat goal;
it is a vital goal to all our country. And people of both political
parties need to get the job done now.
There are some basic principles that must guide our efforts
to fix Social Security. We should not raise the payroll tax rate.
That would hurt the economy and cost jobs. We must ensure that
Social Security continues to provide dignity and peace of mind for
Americans in retirement, and include extra protections for those
with low incomes. We must reject temporary measures that put off
Social Security problems for another day.
You need to be skeptical about any talk that talks about a 75year fix. Back in 1983, Republicans and Democrats came together
on what they thought was a 75-year fix. You know, I like the spirit
of people of both parties coming together, and that was great.
President Reagan and Speaker O’Neill said, we got a problem,
————
302

let’s come together to fix it. But they thought it was a 75-year fix;
here we are, 22 years later. It’s time to come up with a permanent
solution. When people bring forth their ideas in Congress I will
insist that we not have a band-aid approach to Social Security, that
we have a permanent fix. And I’m optimistic about the chances for
meaningful Social Security reform.
You know, a few weeks ago the United States Senate voted on a
resolution guaranteeing that any Social Security fix must be
permanent. The vote has the agreement of the two senators from
South Carolina, the two senators from Texas, the two senators
from Massachusetts. Anytime that happens you’ve got yourself a
bipartisan agreement. In fact, the vote in Congress was unanimous.
Think about that. Every single United States senator is on the record
supporting a permanent fix. Now those senators need to keep their
word and make Social Security solvent once and for all.
Bringing permanent solvency to Social Security is an important
start, but it’s only part of our duty. Preserving Social Security
should not mean preserving its problems. Today we have an
opportunity to offer younger Americans a better deal than the
current system. Today we can give every American the chance to
tap into the power of compound interest, so they can get a higher
rate of return on their money than the current system allows. You
might notice I said, “their money.” See, we’re not spending the
government’s money. The payroll taxes are the people’s money. It’s
coming from hardworking people.
We can build this opportunity into Social Security by giving
younger workers the option to set aside some of their own money in
a personal retirement account. The account would be a conservative
mix of bonds and stocks that grows over time and can deliver a
greater return than the Social Security system does. That would be a
good deal for younger workers.
Since 1983, since that reform took place, stock investments have
returned about 9 percent more than inflation per year, while the real
return on Social Security is about 2 percent a year. That means that
a dollar invested in the market in 1983 would be worth $11 today —
————
303

one dollar would grow to eleven — while the same dollar would
be worth about three if it had been put in Social Security. Every
young American should have the opportunity to take advantage of
the compounding rate of interest, to earn a better return on his or
her own money.
Personal accounts would be completely voluntary; younger
workers could choose to join or choose not to join. That seems to
make sense for government to provide opportunities of choice for
individual Americans. Workers opting to open an account would
be able to put about a third of their payroll taxes in investments,
instead of sending their money to Washington. For example, a
younger worker earning an average of $35,000 a year over a
career, because of the growth of money, would be able to retire
with a nest egg of nearly a quarter-million dollars. That would be a
nice addition to the other Social Security benefits.
These voluntary accounts would come with strict guidelines
to make sure they’re secure. You couldn’t take — put them in the
lottery — sorry to say, Speaker. You could make sure the earnings
aren’t eaten up by hidden Wall Street fees. We’ll make sure there
are good options to protect investments from sudden market
swings on the eve of retirement. You won’t be able to withdraw all
your money and take it to the racetrack. These accounts will offer
straightforward investment choices that are easy to understand.
By the way, this concept isn’t new. After all, in South Carolina,
all state employees can choose to put part of their retirement
savings in a traditional retirement plan, or in a conservative mix of
bonds and stocks that can deliver a better rate of return. So when
I talk about personal accounts available for younger workers, you
know what I’m talking about right here in South Carolina. You’ve
already made that decision for people who are serving the state.
I don’t know if you know this or not, but federal employees
have that same opportunity to watch their money grow, through
a program called the Thrift Savings Plan. It’s a plan that allows
members of the United States Congress and the United States
Senate to set aside some of their own money, if they so choose
————
304

to do so, in a conservative mix of bonds and stocks. It seems fair
to me that if setting up a personal savings account is good enough
for a member of the United States Congress, it is good enough for
workers all across America.
By giving younger workers an option to set up a personal
savings account, we have an opportunity to modernize and
strengthen a great American program. We have a chance to bring
the Social Security system into the 21st century.
The reason I say that is, today young people are comfortable
investing in bonds and stocks. Millions of workers now choose
to plan for retirement with their own savings accounts, through
programs like 401(k)s. I don’t remember growing up hearing
the word 401(k) — I don’t think you remember that. You’re old
enough to be around when they didn’t have 401(k)s or IRAs. We’re
not talking about a new culture, we’re talking about a culture that’s
already taken hold in our society, where workers from all walks of
life are watching their money grow and making decisions on behalf
of their families with where they invest.
See, telling younger workers they have to save money in a
1930s retirement system is like telling them that they have to use
a cell phone with a rotary dial. If young people are confident they
can improve their retirement by investing in a conservative mix of
bonds and stocks, the government should not stand in their way.
Creating these accounts will also give our children and
grandchildren a chance to replace a burden of uncertainty with
a new opportunity. Instead of leaving their full retirement in the
hands of future politicians, younger workers will be able to take
part of their retirement into their own hands. Instead of sending all
the payroll taxes to Washington, younger workers would be able
to transfer part of their money directly into an account they own
and that the government can never take away. Instead of forfeiting
years of Social Security contributions if they die before retirement,
younger workers would have peace of mind that their personal
accounts could be passed on to a loved one.
Young people are learning more about the opportunity to own
————
305

part of their retirement, and they’re making their opinion pretty
clear. I met Philip Meador today. He’s a graduating senior from
The Citadel. He told me he’s going to be starting a new job in June.
He knows he’s going to start paying Social Security taxes. What
he’s not sure about is whether or not he’ll ever be seeing a Social
Security check. He certainly will be paying in; he’s not so sure
what’s going to be coming out. He likes the idea of keeping part
of his money in an account that he controls. He said, “I like the
options. You choose what to put in, you choose the investments. It
depends on what you’re looking for. I think every individual should
be able to choose a plan that fits them.”
A lot of young people are beginning to say that. A lot of young
people want this United States government to come together of
young people want the government to give them the option of
making choices with their own money.
And I know you all feel the same way in this chamber. That’s
why you passed resolutions calling the United States Congress to
strengthen this important program, Social Security, and to give
younger workers the option of voluntary personal retirement
accounts. You recognize that a Social Security system that includes
personal accounts will give all Americans — not just a few, but all
Americans — a stake in the greatest creator of wealth the world has
ever known. You recognize that personal accounts will bring the
security and independence of ownership to millions of our citizens.
And you recognize that personal accounts are critical to building an
ownership society, a more optimistic and more hopeful America, in
which more people own their own homes, more people own their
own businesses, more people have a ownership in a retirement
account, more people have an asset base they call their own that
they can pass on to whomever they choose.
You see, owning assets ought not to be confined to a few
people in our society. Owning an asset and being able to pass it
on to your son or daughter ought not to be the purview of a few.
In this great land, it ought to be spread — ownership ought to be
spread to everybody who is lucky enough to be an American. You
————
306

recognize that when people own something, they have a vital stake
in the future of our country, and that personal accounts will help
give every citizen the chance, the opportunity to realize the dreams
of this land.
The legislature of this great state of South Carolina has shown
leadership on this important issue, and now the United States
Congress needs to do the same. I understand that Social Security
is a tough issue, but Congress has tackled tough issues before.
We’ve seen in the past how leaders from both parties can rise above
partisan politics to meet great responsibilities. And now is the time
for them to do so again.
I am confident that members of Congress will come together
to reach a permanent solution. And when they do, our children
and grandchildren will one day look back and be grateful that our
generation made the difficult choices and the necessary choices to
renew the great promise of the Social Security system for the 21st
century.
I want to thank you all for the invitation to come to your great
state. I appreciate you giving me a chance to come and visit. It’s an
honor to talk about such an important topic with those who have
been willing to serve. May God bless you in your efforts, and may
God bless your families, and may God continue to bless the United
States of America.

Good evening. One of the most consequential decisions a
President makes is his appointment of a Justice to the Supreme
Court. When a President chooses a Justice, he’s placing in human
hands the authority and majesty of the law. The decisions of the
Supreme Court affect the life of every American.
And so a nominee to that Court must be a person of superb
credentials and the highest integrity; a person who will faithfully
apply the Constitution and keep our founding promise of equal
justice under law. I have found such a person in Judge John
Roberts.
And tonight, I’m honored to announce that I am nominating
him to serve as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court. John
Roberts currently serves on one of the most influential courts in
the nation, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia Circuit.
Before he was a — before he was a respected judge, he was
known as one of the most distinguished and talented attorneys in
America. John Roberts has devoted his entire professional life
to the cause of justice and is widely admired for his intellect, his
sound judgment, and personal decency.
Judge Roberts was born in Buffalo and grew up in Indiana.
In high school, he captained his football team, and he worked
summers in a steel mill to help pay his way through college.
He’s an honors graduate of both Harvard College and Harvard
Law School. In his career, he has served as a law clerk to Justice
William Rehnquist, as an Associate Counsel to President Ronald
Reagan, and as the Principal Deputy Solicitor General in the
Department of Justice.
————
309

In public service and in private practice, he has argued 39
cases before the Supreme Court and earned a reputation as one of
the best legal minds of his generation. Judge Roberts has earned
the respect of people from both political parties. After he was
nominated for the Court of Appeals in 2001, a bipartisan group
of more than 150 lawyers sent a letter to the Senate Judiciary
Committee. They wrote:
“Although as individuals we reflect a wide spectrum of
political party affiliation and ideology, we are united in our belief
that John Roberts will be an outstanding federal court appeals
judge and should be confirmed by the United States Senate.”
The signers of this letter included a former counsel to a
Republican President, a former counsel to two Democratic
Presidents, and a former — and former high-ranking Justice
Department officials of both parties.
My decision to nominate Judge Roberts to the Supreme Court
came after a thorough and deliberative process. My staff and I
consulted with more than 70 members of the United States Senate.
I received good advice from both Republicans and Democrats.
I appreciate the care they took. I’m grateful for their advice. I
reviewed the credentials of many well-qualified men and women. I
met personally with a number of potential nominees.
In my meetings with Judge Roberts, I have been deeply
impressed. He’s a man of extraordinary accomplishment and
ability. He has a good heart. He has the qualities Americans expect
in a judge: experience, wisdom, fairness, and civility. He has
profound respect for the rule of law and for the liberties guaranteed
to every citizen. He will strictly apply the Constitution and laws,
not legislate from the bench.
He’s also a man of character who loves his country and his
family. I’m pleased that his wife, Jane, and his two beautiful
children, Jack and Josie, could be with us tonight. Judge Roberts
has served his fellow citizens well, and he is prepared for even
greater service.
Under the Constitution, Judge Roberts now goes before the
————
310

United States Senate for confirmation. I’ve recently spoken with
leaders Senator First and Senator Reid, and with senior members
of the Judiciary Committee, Chairman Specter and Senator Leahy.
These senators share my goal of a dignified confirmation process
that is conducted with fairness and civility. The appointments of
the two most recent Justices to the Supreme Court prove that this
confirmation can be done in a timely manner.
So I have full confidence that the Senate will rise to the
occasion and act promptly on this nomination. It is important
that the newest Justice be on the bench when the Supreme Court
reconvenes in October. I believe that Democrats and Republicans
alike will see the strong qualifications of this fine judge as they did
when they confirmed him by unanimous consent to the judicial seat
he now holds.
I look forward to the Senate voting to confirm Judge John
Roberts as the 109th Justice of the Supreme Court of the United
States. Judge Roberts, thank you for agreeing to serve, and
congratulations.


Thank you all. Siéntese. Thank you very much for the warm
welcome. Thank you to the Hispanic Alliance For Free Trade
for inviting me here today. And thanks to the Organization of
American States for providing this fantastic forum.
What a beautiful building. What makes it even more beautiful
is that the Organization of American States promotes democracy
and freedom. There’s nothing more beautiful than freedom. And
I appreciate your commitment to democracy and freedom. And I
appreciate the chance to come to talk about a treaty — CAFTA —
that will not only provide more prosperity in our hemisphere, it’s
not only a good deal for American workers and business owners
and farmers, this treaty will help spread democracy and peace.
Thanks for letting me come by. Raul, thank you. Muchos
gracias. It’s good to see you again. Raul is such a strong leader in
the Latino community in my state of Texas that he had the high
honor of having a school named for him. I can’t thank you enough
for being the leader you have been. And thank you Anne Alonzo
for inviting me here today, and for helping us get the bill passed.
For those of you who are members of the Hispanic Alliance
For Free Trade, I want to remind you, it’s one thing to come and
listen to a President speak; it’s another thing to work the halls of
Congress, so people speak by their votes, people that listen to you
in a concrete way. So thanks for coming. Thanks for being a part of
passing CAFTA.
I want to thank the Secretary General, General Insulza. Thank
you, sir, for you. I want to thank the Vice President, Samuel
Lewis, of the Republic of Panama. I appreciate the members of
the Diplomatic Corps who are here. I particularly want to thank
————
313

the diplomats from Central America and the Dominican Republic.
I urge you to work the bill. I urge you to let people know the
consequence of passage and the consequences of failure. It’s
important for people to understand the stakes.
I want to thank the Permanent Representatives to the
Organization of American States. I want to thank my friend,
Ambassador Juan Maisto — Embajador. Thank you, Juan, for
being here.
I appreciate the members of my Cabinet who are working hard
on this piece of legislation. We got the Secretary of Agriculture,
Mike Johanns, who is with us. Secretary Carlos Gutierrez is with
us here. Ambassador Rob Portman, who is the point person from
my administration on this important piece of legislation. They’re
working hard; I’m working hard.
I want to thank the people from the United States Congress
who’ve joined us: Ileana Ros-Lehtinen from Florida, I’m glad
you’re here, thanks for coming. Randy Neugebauer from West
Texas, thank you for coming, Randy. Henry Cuellar, south Texas
— sur de Tejas. And, finally, Charlie Dent, thanks for coming. I’m
proud you all are here. Thanks for lending your support to this
important occasion. I’ve made my decision to support this bill
because I think it’s in the best interest of the country.
As a matter of fact, I make a lot of decisions as your President.
made one the other night, when I announced my nomination of
Judge John Roberts to the Supreme Court. I appreciate so very
much the reception he’s receiving in the United States Senate.
I want to thank the senators from both political parties who are
giving Judge Roberts a chance to talk about his heart, to talk about
his philosophy.
He is a person that will make all Americans proud to be a
member of the Supreme Court. He is a — he’s got the experience,
wisdom, fairness and civility to be a really good judge. He has
a profound respect for the rule of law. He respects the liberties
guaranteed in our Constitution to all Americans, from — people
from all walks of life. He’ll strictly apply the Constitution; he’s not
————
314

going to legislate from the bench.
The United States Senate can show our country that it’s able to
have a civil debate on this very important nomination — not only a
civil debate, but a timely debate. It’s important for Judge Roberts to
be confirmed by the time the Court reconvenes in October. I thank
the Senate for their action today. I urge the Senate to do its duty
to have a fair, timely hearing, and get this good man confirmed in
time for the October reconvening of the Court.
We’ll be talking about our economy and liberty in our
neighborhood here in a minute, but I want to remind you all, want
to remind leaders from our country, and of course the leaders from
other countries that are here, that we’re living in historic times.
And one of the reasons I say that is we’re still at war, see. And it’s
important for all of us who love freedom to understand that this is
a war being fought against ideologues that use terror to advance
an agenda. This is a war against killers, cold-blooded killers who
embrace an ideology of hatred. Their vision of the world is the
opposite of our vision of the world. We believe in human rights,
human dignity, minority rights and religious rights. We believe in
universal freedoms.
They have a different view of the world. They don’t believe in
women’s rights. They have usurped a great religion and defined
it in their terms. And if you happen to live in a society in which
they’re dominant, like the Taliban was in Afghanistan, and if
you don’t adhere to their view of religion, you’re punished. They
have territorial designs. They have the desire to use their terrorist
techniques to frighten us. In other words, they understand when
they kill in cold blood it ends up on our TV screens. And they’re
trying to shake our will. And they’re trying to create vacuums into
which their ideology can move.
They don’t understand our country, though. They don’t
understand that when it comes to the defense of universal
freedoms, this country won’t be frightened. We will defend
ourselves by staying on the offense against these killers. We will
find them overseas so we don’t have to face them here at home.
————
315

And at the same time we understand that to defeat an ideology of
hate, you work to spread an ideology of hope. And there’s nothing
more hopeful than a system which recognizes the rights of people,
in which government is accountable to the people. And that system
is democracy, based upon universal freedom.
We are laying the foundation for peace for generations to
come. As we fight the terrorists and defend this homeland, we’re
also working to make sure this economy is strong and vibrant —
and we’ve got reason for optimism. The tax relief we delivered is
working. This economy of ours has overcome a lot and now it’s the
fastest-growing economy of any major industrialized nation in the
world. Inflation is low. We’re well ahead of reaching our goal to cut
our deficit in half by 2009. We’ve had 25 consecutive months of job
gains. The unemployment rate is down to 5 percent. More people
are working today in America than ever before in our nation’s
history.
And one of the reasons why is because this administration
recognizes that the way you grow an economy is you stimulate
the entrepreneurial sector. Government doesn’t create wealth,
government creates an environment in which the entrepreneur is
willing to take risks. And I’m pleased to report the entrepreneurial
spirit in our Latino communities across the country is strong,
vibrant and doing well.
We believe in encouraging ownership. The more people own
something, the better off this country will be. We want more
people owning their own business. Because of the vibrancy of
our economy, the Hispanic unemployment rate has dropped to 5.8
percent, down from 8.4 percent two years ago. More people are
working. More Hispanics own their home than ever before in our
nation’s history, and that’s great news for the American society.
SBA loans to Hispanic-owned businesses are up by —doubled since
I took office. In other words, there is a role for government to help.
But the Hispanic community is an entrepreneurial community to
begin with, and it’s responding and it’s really good news for the
country.
————
316

Therefore, it doesn’t surprise me to learn that many Hispanic
entrepreneurs and business owners and leaders understand the
importance of expanding trade within our hemisphere. And that is
why you have come to lend your support to the Central AmericanDominican Republic Free Trade Agreement, and I’m grateful. By
eliminating barriers to exports from our country, CAFTA will help
keep the U.S. economy growing. In other words, this is a jobs
program. This will help jobs.
By opening up Central America and the Dominican Republic
to U.S. trade and investment, CAFTA will help those countries
develop a better life for their citizens. That seems to make sense
to me. I mean, if you’re living in a neighborhood, you want your
neighbors doing well. If you’re a good neighbor you say, gosh, I
hope everybody in the neighborhood is succeeding. And by helping
those economies improve, CAFTA will help the nations strengthen
their democracies. And that’s in our national security interest.
That’s makes us all more secure.
So this bill is more than a trade bill. This bill is a commitment
of freedom-loving nations to advance peace and prosperity
throughout the Western hemisphere. And that’s important for
members of Congress to understand.
CAFTA begins by ensuring that free trade is fair trade. I
mean — you know, I traveled the country quite extensively in the
recent past and said, I’m a free trader. But I reminded people in our
country I’m also for fair trade. It’s one thing to advocate free trade;
I believe the government has a role to make sure that trade is fair
for all of us. In other words, we want people treating us the way we
treat them.
It turns out that exports from Central America into the United
States face almost no tariffs. Now, I don’t see how a member of
Congress can go back to his or her district and say this is a good
deal for America, when our exports to Central America face hefty
tariffs. In other words, if you’re for free trade you ought to be
insisting that the trade be fair. And the only thing that makes the
trade fair to me, seems like, is to say to our friends in Central
————
317

America, just treat us the way we treat you.
And that’s what CAFTA does — it eliminates tariffs on our
goods and services going into Central America. In other words,
they treat us the way we treat them. It levels the playing field,
which makes this a good deal for America’s farmers and small
business owners and manufacturers.
Last year, United States businesses exported more than $15
billion of goods to Central America. Now, when I say “export
goods,” people got to understand that means somebody is more
likely to have a job. It means somebody is producing something
that somebody wants in Central America, which is part of the
employment picture in our country. Our business leaders say that
CAFTA would significantly increase exports to the region. That’s
why I say this is a job program. As exports go up, somebody is
either more likely to find a job or somebody is more likely to retain
a job.
Take this example. California’s Haas Automation Company, it
is the largest machine tool manufacturer in the United States. They
strongly support this piece of legislation. It says that with CAFTA,
it expects to increase sales to Central America tenfold. In other
words, they see business opportunity, which means job opportunity
for somebody who’s helping Haas Automation manufacture
equipment that somebody in Central America wants to purchase.
Again, another company example here. It’s called, “Bush Hog.
” I don’t know why they would have put this example in this
speech. I hope it wasn’t named after me. But it is an Alabama
company that makes farm equipment like backhoes and tillers
and rotary cutters. And the folks at Bush Hog say that farmers in
Central America would find their high-quality, made-in-the-United
States machinery attractive — if the tariffs on that equipment
would be eliminated. So when you hear me say “tariff,” that really
means it’s pricing our equipment out of the reach of the market.
That’s what a tariff does. It’s like a tax.
So the good folks at Bush Hog manufacture something
somebody wants to buy, but it’s too pricey — not because of the
————
318

cost of the product they produce, but because of government
action. And so the purpose of NAFTA [sic] is to remove the trade
barriers. Now, we’ve had people look at this piece of legislation,
the National Association of Manufacturers — people that represent
people who manufacture something here in America, say that
CAFTA would increase our manufacture exports to the region by
a billion dollars, a 7 percent increase. That’s good news for the
manufacturing sector of the American economy.
The American Farm Bureau — they represent farmers, needless
to say — estimate that by the time CAFTA is fully implemented,
it would increase U.S. farm exports by as much as $1.5 billion.
Let me talk about farming real quick. We produce more than we
consume in the United States. And, therefore, it makes sense for
government policy and for our Secretary of Agriculture to work
to find markets for that which we produce. And if the products
we produce are taxed via tariff, it makes those products more
expensive than need be. And, therefore, by reducing tariffs on
agricultural exports from the United States, it opened up markets
for our ranchers and farmers.
The U.S. International Trade Commission says that by passing
CAFTA we will reduce the trade deficit by more than $750 million.
So this bill is good for the overall financial picture of the United
States. That’s why the United States House of Representatives,
next week, ought to understand the economic wisdom of this
bill, and open up the market of 44 million consumers to U.S.
businesses, U.S. farms, and U.S. manufacturers.
CAFTA includes strong enforcement provisions that go further
than previous trade agreements. To protect our textile workers from
unfair competition, CAFTA gives our Custom agents the ability to
conduct surprise visits on Central American factories. It’s one way
you make sure trade is fair, you’re being treated fairly.
To promote a cleaner environment, CAFTA includes provisions
that will monitor and enforce environmental progress. To ensure
that Central American factories abide by acceptable labor
standards, CAFTA insists on stiff fines for violations. And the
————
319

United States government has committed about $180 million over
five years to ensure that labor laws are enforced. CAFTA is a trade
agreement that will be enforced. And we’ve got the money in the
budget to do so.
CAFTA will help the nations of Central America deliver
prosperity and opportunity for their citizens. Let me repeat that.
CAFTA is not only good for us, it’s good for their partners. That’s
a fair deal. That’s what you want. You want an agreement to be
balanced and fair. We want the agreement to be good for us, but we
also want the agreement to be good for our friends. It’s a lousy deal
if it’s a zero-sum deal. This is a good deal for CAFTA nations.
CAFTA will help nations attract investment they need for their
economies to grow. In other words, with a stable trading agreement
with the United States, it will make it much easier for investment
to flow to our CAFTA friends. And investment means growth and
opportunity. That’s what that means.
By reducing tariffs on our products, CAFTA will allow
consumers in their countries to enjoy goods and services at better
prices. If a country doesn’t produce a lot of a particular product and
they need it, and it’s got a tariff on it, it means the consumers pay
an additional price. By reducing tariffs, it means that consumers in
the CAFTA nations will be able to more likely purchase that which
they want at a better price. It seems like to make sense to me that if
you lower the cost of food products coming from the United States
to CAFTA, that’s beneficial for a mom trying to buy food for her
child. This is consumer-friendly in the CAFTA countries.
By lowering tariffs, CAFTA will give Central American
businesses less — less costly access to high-quality machinery.
In other words, it’s going to be beneficial for the small business
owner, or the large business owner, the person who employs people
in the CAFTA country to be able to buy machinery necessary to
stay competitive.
By bringing economic growth — in other words, these are
all elements of creating growth — increasing consumer demand
by lowering prices, increasing investment make it more likely
————
320

people will be able to purchase the equipment they need to stay
competitive — all this leads to more growth, which will help
contribute to a vibrant middle class. And that’s what we want
in our neighborhood. We want there to be prosperity. We want
people to have a better chance at a better life. It’s in our nation’s
advantage that prosperity grow throughout the neighborhood.
Elected leaders of Central America know that by opening up
their nations’ markets to competition they’re helping to raise
standards for their own businesses and farmers. In other words,
if you protect industries, it tends to become non-competitive.
It’s very important for our societies to remain productive, and
productivity increases happen because of competition.
By giving their garment makers an incentive to use U.S.
fabrics and materials, our partners are creating really a regional
partnership that will help both of us — both the CAFTA nations
and the Dominican Republic and the United States — compete
with Asian producers that are using Asian materials. And that’s
important for members of Congress to understand, that if we want
to — this agreement will help us remain competitive with Asian
producers on certain products.
People of Central America have made their choice. They know
their economic future lies in free and fair trade with the United
States. They’ve said, we want to join with the United States.
And that’s important. When this bill is passed, this country will
be sending a strong message: We want to join with you, as well.
You want to join with us in free and fair trade; we want to join
with you. And it’s that alliance of interest that will make this
neighborhood better. And it’s important for members of Congress
to understand that.
We cannot, and should not, reject these young democracies.
We must support democracy in our neighborhood. And CAFTA
will strengthen democracies. CAFTA nations a while ago were
struggling with dictatorship and tyranny and civil strife. It wasn’t
all that long ago that a lot of our foreign policy was occupied by
actions that had been taken by governments in Central America.
————
321

Today, I’m more than proud to welcome democracies to the Oval
Office. These are peaceful countries. These are freedom-loving
countries.
The leaders of these nations have made impressive gains toward
establishing — firmly establishing democracy. But these gains
cannot be taken for granted. And that’s important for members of
the United States House of Representatives to understand clearly.
Democracy cannot be taken for granted. We must provide the
foundation for democracy through smart policy, CAFTA’s smart
policy. It’s good trade policy. It makes it more likely somebody is
going to be able to work in America when we pass CAFTA, but it
also helps the neighborhood.
You see, there’s no democracy — those new democracies
in Central America still face forces that oppose democratic
government. Make no mistake about it — there are people in
our own neighborhood that oppose democracy; they’re trying to
separate our friends from the United States by sewing resentment
and anger. People of this region need to see that democracy
produces more than just free elections, that democracy produces
measurable progress in their lives. As the oldest democracy in
this hemisphere, we have a moral obligation and a vital interest in
helping the Central American economies and societies succeed.
And, therefore, CAFTA needs to be passed.
By strengthening democracy in the region, CAFTA will lead
to greater security and stability. I appreciate so very much the hard
work of the Central American leadership. I’ve had a chance to visit
with these good folks. As a matter of fact, they’ve been coming to
America quite often, and I’ve been going there sometimes. And
that’s important; that’s what friends do, they strategize, they talk.
The American people have got to understand, we’ve got friends
in the leadership in Central America. And they’re working hard to
punish corruption and keep the streets safe. They’re working hard
to make sure they have a society that respects human rights and
the rule of law. We’re working together to nail the drug traffickers
and terrorists and criminal gangs who feed on lawlessness and
————
322

instability.
CAFTA will strengthen those who are taking on the forces of
radicalism and violence in this hemisphere, and it will make our
country more secure. As former governor of a state that shares
a long border with Mexico, I know first-hand the importance of
improving ties with our neighbors. It’s really important that you’ve
got strong ties in a neighborhood in which you live. I understand the
importance of removing trade barriers that make it difficult for our
businesses and farmers to compete.
This bill that the House of Representatives will be voting
on next week is pro-jobs, pro-growth, and pro-democracy. It is
important that we pass this piece of legislation. And I want to
thank you all for giving me a chance to come and talk about its
importance. And I encourage you to keep doing what you’re doing,
is talking to members of the United States Congress and remind
them, set aside partisan politics for the good of the United States of
America. It’s in our economic interests, it’s in our national security
interests that the House of Representatives join the United States
Senate and pass that CAFTA bill, which I’ll proudly sign on behalf
of America’s workers and small businesses and those of us who love
and cherish democracy.
May God bless you.

Good evening. I’m speaking to you from the city of New
Orleans — nearly empty, still partly under water, and waiting for
life and hope to return. Eastward from Lake Pontchartrain, across
the Mississippi coast, to Alabama into Florida, millions of lives
were changed in a day by a cruel and wasteful storm.
In the aftermath, we have seen fellow citizens left stunned
and uprooted, searching for loved ones, and grieving for the dead,
and looking for meaning in a tragedy that seems so blind and
random. We’ve also witnessed the kind of desperation no citizen of
this great and generous nation should ever have to know — fellow
Americans calling out for food and water, vulnerable people left
at the mercy of criminals who had no mercy, and the bodies of the
dead lying uncovered and untended in the street.
These days of sorrow and outrage have also been marked by
acts of courage and kindness that make all Americans proud. Coast
Guard and other personnel rescued tens of thousands of people
from flooded neighborhoods. Religious congregations and families
have welcomed strangers as brothers and sisters and neighbors.
In the community of Chalmette, when two men tried to break into
a home, the owner invited them to stay — and took in 15 other
people who had no place to go. At Tulane Hospital for Children,
doctors and nurses did not eat for days so patients could have food,
and eventually carried the patients on their backs up eight flights
of stairs to helicopters.
Many first responders were victims themselves, wounded
healers, with a sense of duty greater than their own suffering.
When I met Steve Scott of the Biloxi Fire Department, he and his
colleagues were conducting a house-to-house search for survivors.
Steve told me this: “I lost my house and I lost my cars, but I still
————
325

got my family ... and I still got my spirit.”
Across the Gulf Coast, among people who have lost much,
and suffered much, and given to the limit of their power, we are
seeing that same spirit — a core of strength that survives all hurt,
a faith in God no storm can take away, and a powerful American
determination to clear the ruins and build better than before.
Tonight so many victims of the hurricane and the flood are far
from home and friends and familiar things. You need to know that
our whole nation cares about you, and in the journey ahead you’re
not alone. To all who carry a burden of loss, I extend the deepest
sympathy of our country. To every person who has served and
sacrificed in this emergency, I offer the gratitude of our country.
And tonight I also offer this pledge of the American people:
Throughout the area hit by the hurricane, we will do what it
takes, we will stay as long as it takes, to help citizens rebuild their
communities and their lives. And all who question the future of the
Crescent City need to know there is no way to imagine America
without New Orleans, and this great city will rise again.
The work of rescue is largely finished; the work of recovery
is moving forward. In nearly all of Mississippi, electric power
has been restored. Trade is starting to return to the Port of
New Orleans, and agricultural shipments are moving down
the Mississippi River. All major gasoline pipelines are now in
operation, preventing the supply disruptions that many feared.
The breaks in the levees have been closed, the pumps are running,
and the water here in New Orleans is receding by the hour.
Environmental officials are on the ground, taking water samples,
identifying and dealing with hazardous debris, and working to get
drinking water and waste water treatment systems operating again.
And some very sad duties are being carried out by professionals
who gather the dead, treat them with respect, and prepare them for
their rest.
In the task of recovery and rebuilding, some of the hardest
work is still ahead, and it will require the creative skill and
generosity of a united country.
————
326

Our first commitment is to meet the immediate needs of those
who had to flee their homes and leave all their possessions behind.
For these Americans, every night brings uncertainty, every day
requires new courage, and in the months to come will bring more
than their fair share of struggles.
The Department of Homeland Security is registering evacuees
who are now in shelters and churches, or private homes, whether
in the Gulf region or far away. I have signed an order providing
immediate assistance to people from the disaster area. As of today,
more than 500,000 evacuee families have gotten emergency help
to pay for food, clothing, and other essentials. Evacuees who have
not yet registered should contact FEMA or the Red Cross. We
need to know who you are, because many of you will be eligible
for broader assistance in the future. Many families were separated
during the evacuation, and we are working to help you reunite.
Please call this number: 1-877-568-3317 — that’s 1-877-568-3317
— and we will work to bring your family back together, and pay
for your travel to reach them.
In addition, we’re taking steps to ensure that evacuees do not
have to travel great distances or navigate bureaucracies to get the
benefits that are there for them. The Department of Health and
Human Services has sent more than 1,500 health professionals,
along with over 50 tons of medical supplies — including vaccines
and antibiotics and medicines for people with chronic conditions
such as diabetes. The Social Security Administration is delivering
checks. The Department of Labor is helping displaced persons
apply for temporary jobs and unemployment benefits. And the
Postal Service is registering new addresses so that people can get
their mail.
To carry out the first stages of the relief effort and begin
rebuilding at once, I have asked for, and the Congress has provided,
more than $60 billion. This is an unprecedented response to an
unprecedented crisis, which demonstrates the compassion and
resolve of our nation.
Our second commitment is to help the citizens of the Gulf

Coast to overcome this disaster, put their lives back together, and
rebuild their communities. Along this coast, for mile after mile,
the wind and water swept the land clean. In Mississippi, many
thousands of houses were damaged or destroyed. In New Orleans
and surrounding parishes, more than a quarter-million houses are no
longer safe to live in. Hundreds of thousands of people from across
this region will need to find longer-term housing.
Our goal is to get people out of the shelters by the middle of
October. So we’re providing direct assistance to evacuees that
allows them to rent apartments, and many already are moving into
places of their own. A number of states have taken in evacuees and
shown them great compassion — admitting children to school, and
providing health care. So I will work with the Congress to ensure
that states are reimbursed for these extra expenses.
In the disaster area, and in cities that have received huge
numbers of displaced people, we’re beginning to bring in mobile
homes and trailers for temporary use. To relieve the burden on local
health care facilities in the region, we’re sending extra doctors and
nurses to these areas. We’re also providing money that can be used
to cover overtime pay for police and fire departments while the
cities and towns rebuild.
Near New Orleans, and Biloxi, and other cities, housing is
urgently needed for police and firefighters, other service providers,
and the many workers who are going to rebuild these cities. Right
now, many are sleeping on ships we have brought to the Port of
New Orleans — and more ships are on their way to the region. And
we’ll provide mobile homes, and supply them with basic services,
as close to construction areas as possible, so the rebuilding process
can go forward as quickly as possible.
And the federal government will undertake a close partnership
with the states of Louisiana and Mississippi, the city of New
Orleans, and other Gulf Coast cities, so they can rebuild in a
sensible, well-planned way. Federal funds will cover the great
majority of the costs of repairing public infrastructure in the disaster
zone, from roads and bridges to schools and water systems. Our
————
328

goal is to get the work done quickly. And taxpayers expect this
work to be done honestly and wisely — so we’ll have a team of
inspectors general reviewing all expenditures.
In the rebuilding process, there will be many important
decisions and many details to resolve, yet we’re moving forward
according to some clear principles. The federal government will
be fully engaged in the mission, but Governor Barbour, Governor
Blanco, Mayor Nagin, and other state and local leaders will
have the primary role in planning for their own future. Clearly,
communities will need to move decisively to change zoning laws
and building codes, in order to avoid a repeat of what we’ve seen.
And in the work of rebuilding, as many jobs as possible should
go to the men and women who live in Louisiana, Mississippi, and
Alabama.
Our third commitment is this: When communities are
rebuilt, they must be even better and stronger than before the
storm. Within the Gulf region are some of the most beautiful and
historic places in America. As all of us saw on television, there’s
also some deep, persistent poverty in this region, as well. That
poverty has roots in a history of racial discrimination, which cut
off generations from the opportunity of America. We have a duty
to confront this poverty with bold action. So let us restore all that
we have cherished from yesterday, and let us rise above the legacy
of inequality. When the streets are rebuilt, there should be many
new businesses, including minority-owned businesses, along those
streets. When the houses are rebuilt, more families should own,
not rent, those houses. When the regional economy revives, local
people should be prepared for the jobs being created.
Americans want the Gulf Coast not just to survive, but to
thrive; not just to cope, but to overcome. We want evacuees to
come home, for the best of reasons — because they have a real
chance at a better life in a place they love.
When one resident of this city who lost his home was asked by
a reporter if he would relocate, he said, “Naw, I will rebuild — but
I will build higher.” That is our vision for the future, in this city
————
329

and beyond: We’ll not just rebuild, we’ll build higher and better.
To meet this goal, I will listen to good ideas from Congress, and
state and local officials, and the private sector. I believe we should
start with three initiatives that the Congress should pass.
Tonight I propose the creation of a Gulf Opportunity Zone,
encompassing the region of the disaster in Louisiana and
Mississippi and Alabama. Within this zone, we should provide
immediate incentives for job-creating investment, tax relief
for small businesses, incentives to companies that create jobs,
and loans and loan guarantees for small businesses, including
minority-owned enterprises, to get them up and running again.
It is entrepreneurship that creates jobs and opportunity; it is
entrepreneurship that helps break the cycle of poverty; and we will
take the side of entrepreneurs as they lead the economic revival of
the Gulf region.
I propose the creation of Worker Recovery Accounts to help
those evacuees who need extra help finding work. Under this plan,
the federal government would provide accounts of up to $5,000,
which these evacuees could draw upon for job training and
education to help them get a good job, and for child care expenses
during their job search.
And to help lower-income citizens in the hurricane region
build new and better lives, I also propose that Congress pass an
Urban Homesteading Act. Under this approach, we will identify
property in the region owned by the federal government, and
provide building sites to low-income citizens free of charge,
through a lottery. In return, they would pledge to build on the
lot, with either a mortgage or help from a charitable organization
like Habitat for Humanity. Home ownership is one of the great
strengths of any community, and it must be a central part of our
vision for the revival of this region.
In the long run, the New Orleans area has a particular
challenge, because much of the city lies below sea level. The
people who call it home need to have reassurance that their
lives will be safer in the years to come. Protecting a city that sits
————
330

lower than the water around it is not easy, but it can, and has been
done. City and parish officials in New Orleans, and state officials
in Louisiana will have a large part in the engineering decisions to
come. And the Army Corps of Engineers will work at their side to
make the flood protection system stronger than it has ever been.
The work that has begun in the Gulf Coast region will be one
of the largest reconstruction efforts the world has ever seen. When
that job is done, all Americans will have something to be very
proud of — and all Americans are needed in this common effort.
It is the armies of compassion — charities and houses of worship,
and idealistic men and women — that give our reconstruction effort
its humanity. They offer to those who hurt a friendly face, an arm
around the shoulder, and the reassurance that in hard times, they
can count on someone who cares. By land, by sea, and by air, good
people wanting to make a difference deployed to the Gulf Coast,
and they’ve been working around the clock ever since.
The cash needed to support the armies of compassion is great,
and Americans have given generously. For example, the private
fundraising effort led by former Presidents Bush and Clinton has
already received pledges of more than $100 million. Some of that
money is going to the Governors to be used for immediate needs
within their states. A portion will also be sent to local houses of
worship to help reimburse them for the expense of helping others.
This evening the need is still urgent, and I ask the American people
to continue donating to the Salvation Army, the Red Cross, other
good charities, and religious congregations in the region.
It’s also essential for the many organizations of our country
to reach out to your fellow citizens in the Gulf area. So I’ve asked
USA Freedom Corps to create an information clearinghouse,
available at usafreedomcorps.gov, so that families anywhere in the
country can find opportunities to help families in the region, or a
school can support a school. And I challenge existing organizations
— churches, and Scout troops, or labor union locals to get in touch
with their counterparts in Mississippi, Louisiana, or Alabama, and
learn what they can do to help. In this great national enterprise,
————
331

important work can be done by everyone, and everyone should find
their role and do their part.
The government of this nation will do its part, as well. Our
cities must have clear and up-to-date plans for responding to natural
disasters, and disease outbreaks, or a terrorist attack, for evacuating
large numbers of people in an emergency, and for providing the
food and water and security they would need. In a time of terror
threats and weapons of mass destruction, the danger to our citizens
reaches much wider than a fault line or a flood plain. I consider
detailed emergency planning to be a national security priority,
and therefore, I’ve ordered the Department of Homeland Security
to undertake an immediate review, in cooperation with local
counterparts, of emergency plans in every major city in America.
I also want to know all the facts about the government response
to Hurricane Katrina. The storm involved a massive flood, a major
supply and security operation, and an evacuation order affecting
more than a million people. It was not a normal hurricane — and
the normal disaster relief system was not equal to it. Many of
the men and women of the Coast Guard, the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, the United States military, the National
Guard, Homeland Security, and state and local governments
performed skillfully under the worst conditions. Yet the system,
at every level of government, was not well-coordinated, and was
overwhelmed in the first few days. It is now clear that a challenge
on this scale requires greater federal authority and a broader role for
the armed forces — the institution of our government most capable
of massive logistical operations on a moment’s notice.
Four years after the frightening experience of September
the 11th, Americans have every right to expect a more effective
response in a time of emergency. When the federal government
fails to meet such an obligation, I, as President, am responsible
for the problem, and for the solution. So I’ve ordered every
Cabinet Secretary to participate in a comprehensive review of the
government response to the hurricane. This government will learn
the lessons of Hurricane Katrina. We’re going to review every
————
332

action and make necessary changes, so that we are better prepared
for any challenge of nature, or act of evil men, that could threaten
our people.
The United States Congress also has an important oversight
function to perform. Congress is preparing an investigation, and I
will work with members of both parties to make sure this effort is
thorough.
In the life of this nation, we have often been reminded that
nature is an awesome force, and that all life is fragile. We’re the
heirs of men and women who lived through those first terrible
winters at Jamestown and Plymouth, who rebuilt Chicago after
a great fire, and San Francisco after a great earthquake, who
reclaimed the prairie from the Dust Bowl of the 1930s. Every time,
the people of this land have come back from fire, flood, and storm
to build anew — and to build better than what we had before.
Americans have never left our destiny to the whims of nature —
and we will not start now.
These trials have also reminded us that we are often stronger
than we know — with the help of grace and one another. They
remind us of a hope beyond all pain and death, a God who
welcomes the lost to a house not made with hands. And they remind
us that we’re tied together in this life, in this nation — and that the
despair of any touches us all.
I know that when you sit on the steps of a porch where a home
once stood, or sleep on a cot in a crowded shelter, it is hard to
imagine a bright future. But that future will come. The streets of
Biloxi and Gulfport will again be filled with lovely homes and the
sound of children playing. The churches of Alabama will have their
broken steeples mended and their congregations whole. And here
in New Orleans, the street cars will once again rumble down St.
Charles, and the passionate soul of a great city will return.
In this place, there’s a custom for the funerals of jazz musicians.
The funeral procession parades slowly through the streets, followed
by a band playing a mournful dirge as it moves to the cemetery.
Once the casket has been laid in place, the band breaks into a joyful
————
333

“second line” — symbolizing the triumph of the spirit over death.
Tonight the Gulf Coast is still coming through the dirge — yet we
will live to see the second line.
Thank you, and may God bless America.


Thank you all. Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, members
of Congress, members of the Supreme Court and diplomatic corps,
distinguished guests, and fellow citizens: Today our nation lost
a beloved, graceful, courageous woman who called America to
its founding ideals and carried on a noble dream. Tonight we are
comforted by the hope of a glad reunion with the husband who was
taken so long ago, and we are grateful for the good life of Coretta
Scott King.
Every time I’m invited to this rostrum, I’m humbled by the
privilege, and mindful of the history we’ve seen together. We have
gathered under this Capitol dome in moments of national mourning
and national achievement. We have served America through one of
the most consequential periods of our history — and it has been my
honor to serve with you.
In a system of two parties, two chambers, and two elected
branches, there will always be differences and debate. But even
tough debates can be conducted in a civil tone, and our differences
cannot be allowed to harden into anger. To confront the great issues
before us, we must act in a spirit of goodwill and respect for one
another — and I will do my part. Tonight the state of our Union is
strong — and together we will make it stronger.
In this decisive year, you and I will make choices that
determine both the future and the character of our country. We
will choose to act confidently in pursuing the enemies of freedom
— or retreat from our duties in the hope of an easier life. We will
choose to build our prosperity by leading the world economy — or
shut ourselves off from trade and opportunity. In a complex and
challenging time, the road of isolationism and protectionism may
————
335

seem broad and inviting — yet it ends in danger and decline. The
only way to protect our people, the only way to secure the peace,
the only way to control our destiny is by our leadership — so the
United States of America will continue to lead.
Abroad, our nation is committed to an historic, long-term
goal — we seek the end of tyranny in our world. Some dismiss
that goal as misguided idealism. In reality, the future security of
America depends on it. On September the 11th, 2001, we found
that problems originating in a failed and oppressive state 7,000
miles away could bring murder and destruction to our country.
Dictatorships shelter terrorists, and feed resentment and radicalism,
and seek weapons of mass destruction. Democracies replace
resentment with hope, respect the rights of their citizens and their
neighbors, and join the fight against terror. Every step toward
freedom in the world makes our country safer — so we will act
boldly in freedom’s cause.
Far from being a hopeless dream, the advance of freedom is the
great story of our time. In 1945, there were about two dozen lonely
democracies in the world. Today, there are 122. And we’re writing a
new chapter in the story of self-government — with women lining
up to vote in Afghanistan, and millions of Iraqis marking their
liberty with purple ink, and men and women from Lebanon to Egypt
debating the rights of individuals and the necessity of freedom. At
the start of 2006, more than half the people of our world live in
democratic nations. And we do not forget the other half — in places
like Syria and Burma, Zimbabwe, North Korea, and Iran — because
the demands of justice, and the peace of this world, require their
freedom, as well.
No one can deny the success of freedom, but some men rage and
fight against it. And one of the main sources of reaction and
opposition is radical Islam — the perversion by a few of a noble
faith into an ideology of terror and death. Terrorists like bin Laden
are serious about mass murder — and all of us must take their
declared intentions seriously. They seek to impose a heartless
system of totalitarian control throughout the Middle East, and arm
————
336

themselves with weapons of mass murder.
Their aim is to seize power in Iraq, and use it as a safe haven to
launch attacks against America and the world. Lacking the military
strength to challenge us directly, the terrorists have chosen the
weapon of fear. When they murder children at a school in Beslan,
or blow up commuters in London, or behead a bound captive, the
terrorists hope these horrors will break our will, allowing the violent
to inherit the Earth. But they have miscalculated: We love our
freedom, and we will fight to keep it.
In a time of testing, we cannot find security by abandoning
our commitments and retreating within our borders. If we were to
leave these vicious attackers alone, they would not leave us alone.
They would simply move the battlefield to our own shores. There
is no peace in retreat. And there is no honor in retreat. By allowing
radical Islam to work its will — by leaving an assaulted world to
fend for itself — we would signal to all that we no longer believe
in our own ideals, or even in our own courage. But our enemies and
our friends can be certain: The United States will not retreat from
the world, and we will never surrender to evil.
America rejects the false comfort of isolationism. We are the
nation that saved liberty in Europe, and liberated death camps, and
helped raise up democracies, and faced down an evil empire. Once
again, we accept the call of history to deliver the oppressed and
move this world toward peace. We remain on the offensive against
terror networks. We have killed or captured many of their leaders —
and for the others, their day will come.
We remain on the offensive in Afghanistan, where a fine
President and a National Assembly are fighting terror while building
the institutions of a new democracy. We’re on the offensive in Iraq,
with a clear plan for victory. First, we’re helping Iraqis build an
inclusive government, so that old resentments will be eased and the
insurgency will be marginalized.
Second, we’re continuing reconstruction efforts, and helping the
Iraqi government to fight corruption and build a modern economy,
so all Iraqis can experience the benefits of freedom. And, third,
————
337

we’re striking terrorist targets while we train Iraqi forces that are
increasingly capable of defeating the enemy. Iraqis are showing
their courage every day, and we are proud to be their allies in the
cause of freedom.
Our work in Iraq is difficult because our enemy is brutal.
But that brutality has not stopped the dramatic progress of a
new democracy. In less than three years, the nation has gone
from dictatorship to liberation, to sovereignty, to a constitution,
to national elections. At the same time, our coalition has been
relentless in shutting off terrorist infiltration, clearing out insurgent
strongholds, and turning over territory to Iraqi security forces. I am
confident in our plan for victory; I am confident in the will of the
Iraqi people; I am confident in the skill and spirit of our military.
Fellow citizens, we are in this fight to win, and we are winning.
The road of victory is the road that will take our troops home.
As we make progress on the ground, and Iraqi forces increasingly
take the lead, we should be able to further decrease our troop levels
— but those decisions will be made by our military commanders,
not by politicians in Washington, D.C.
Our coalition has learned from our experience in Iraq.
We’ve adjusted our military tactics and changed our approach to
reconstruction. Along the way, we have benefitted from responsible
criticism and counsel offered by members of Congress of both
parties. In the coming year, I will continue to reach out and seek
your good advice. Yet, there is a difference between responsible
criticism that aims for success, and defeatism that refuses to
acknowledge anything but failure. Hindsight alone is not wisdom,
and second-guessing is not a strategy.
With so much in the balance, those of us in public office have
a duty to speak with candor. A sudden withdrawal of our forces
from Iraq would abandon our Iraqi allies to death and prison,
would put men like bin Laden and Zarqawi in charge of a strategic
country, and show that a pledge from America means little.
Members of Congress, however we feel about the decisions and
debates of the past, our nation has only one option: We must keep
————
338

our word, defeat our enemies, and stand behind the American
military in this vital mission.
Our men and women in uniform are making sacrifices — and
showing a sense of duty stronger than all fear. They know what
it’s like to fight house to house in a maze of streets, to wear heavy
gear in the desert heat, to see a comrade killed by a roadside bomb.
And those who know the costs also know the stakes. Marine Staff
Sergeant Dan Clay was killed last month fighting in Fallujah. He
left behind a letter to his family, but his words could just as well
be addressed to every American. Here is what Dan wrote: “I know
what honor is. ... It has been an honor to protect and serve all
of you. I faced death with the secure knowledge that you would
not have to.... Never falter! Don’t hesitate to honor and support
those of us who have the honor of protecting that which is worth
protecting.”
Staff Sergeant Dan Clay’s wife, Lisa, and his mom and dad,
Sara Jo and Bud, are with us this evening. Welcome.
Our nation is grateful to the fallen, who live in the memory
of our country. We’re grateful to all who volunteer to wear our
nation’s uniform — and as we honor our brave troops, let us never
forget the sacrifices of America’s military families.
Our offensive against terror involves more than military action.
Ultimately, the only way to defeat the terrorists is to defeat their
dark vision of hatred and fear by offering the hopeful alternative
of political freedom and peaceful change. So the United States of
America supports democratic reform across the broader Middle
East. Elections are vital, but they are only the beginning. Raising
up a democracy requires the rule of law, and protection of
minorities, and strong, accountable institutions that last longer than
a single vote.
The great people of Egypt have voted in a multi-party
presidential election — and now their government should open
paths of peaceful opposition that will reduce the appeal of
radicalism. The Palestinian people have voted in elections. And
now the leaders of Hamas must recognize Israel, disarm, reject
————
339

terrorism, and work for lasting peace. Saudi Arabia has taken the
first steps of reform — now it can offer its people a better future
by pressing forward with those efforts. Democracies in the Middle
East will not look like our own, because they will reflect the
traditions of their own citizens. Yet liberty is the future of every
nation in the Middle East, because liberty is the right and hope of
all humanity.
The same is true of Iran, a nation now held hostage by a small
clerical elite that is isolating and repressing its people. The regime
in that country sponsors terrorists in the Palestinian territories
and in Lebanon — and that must come to an end. The Iranian
government is defying the world with its nuclear ambitions, and
the nations of the world must not permit the Iranian regime to
gain nuclear weapons. America will continue to rally the world to
confront these threats.
Tonight, let me speak directly to the citizens of Iran: America
respects you, and we respect your country. We respect your right
to choose your own future and win your own freedom. And our
nation hopes one day to be the closest of friends with a free and
democratic Iran.
To overcome dangers in our world, we must also take the
offensive by encouraging economic progress, and fighting disease,
and spreading hope in hopeless lands. Isolationism would not
only tie our hands in fighting enemies, it would keep us from
helping our friends in desperate need. We show compassion abroad
because Americans believe in the God-given dignity and worth of
a villager with HIV/AIDS, or an infant with malaria, or a refugee
fleeing genocide, or a young girl sold into slavery. We also show
compassion abroad because regions overwhelmed by poverty,
corruption, and despair are sources of terrorism, and organized
crime, and human trafficking, and the drug trade.
In recent years, you and I have taken unprecedented action
to fight AIDS and malaria, expand the education of girls, and
reward developing nations that are moving forward with economic
and political reform. For people everywhere, the United States
————
340

is a partner for a better life. Short-changing these efforts would
increase the suffering and chaos of our world, undercut our
long-term security, and dull the conscience of our country. I urge
members of Congress to serve the interests of America by showing
the compassion of America.
Our country must also remain on the offensive against
terrorism here at home. The enemy has not lost the desire or
capability to attack us. Fortunately, this nation has superb
professionals in law enforcement, intelligence, the military, and
homeland security. These men and women are dedicating their
lives, protecting us all, and they deserve our support and our
thanks. They also deserve the same tools they already use to fight
drug trafficking and organized crime — so I ask you to reauthorize
the Patriot Act.
It is said that prior to the attacks of September the 11th, our
government failed to connect the dots of the conspiracy. We
now know that two of the hijackers in the United States placed
telephone calls to al Qaeda operatives overseas. But we did not
know about their plans until it was too late. So to prevent another
attack — based on authority given to me by the Constitution and
by statute — I have authorized a terrorist surveillance program
to aggressively pursue the international communications of
suspected al Qaeda operatives and affiliates to and from America.
Previous Presidents have used the same constitutional authority I
have, and federal courts have approved the use of that authority.
Appropriate members of Congress have been kept informed. The
terrorist surveillance program has helped prevent terrorist attacks.
It remains essential to the security of America. If there are people
inside our country who are talking with al Qaeda, we want to know
about it, because we will not sit back and wait to be hit again.
In all these areas — from the disruption of terror networks,
to victory in Iraq, to the spread of freedom and hope in troubled
regions — we need the support of our friends and allies. To
draw that support, we must always be clear in our principles and
willing to act. The only alternative to American leadership is a
————
341

dramatically more dangerous and anxious world. Yet we also
choose to lead because it is a privilege to serve the values that
gave us birth. American leaders — from Roosevelt to Truman to
Kennedy to Reagan — rejected isolation and retreat, because they
knew that America is always more secure when freedom is on the
march.
Our own generation is in a long war against a determined
enemy — a war that will be fought by Presidents of both parties,
who will need steady bipartisan support from the Congress. And
tonight I ask for yours. Together, let us protect our country, support
the men and women who defend us, and lead this world toward
freedom.
Here at home, America also has a great opportunity: We will
build the prosperity of our country by strengthening our economic
leadership in the world.
Our economy is healthy and vigorous, and growing faster than
other major industrialized nations. In the last two-and-a-half years,
America has created 4.6 million new jobs — more than Japan and
the European Union combined. Even in the face of higher energy
prices and natural disasters, the American people have turned in an
economic performance that is the envy of the world.
The American economy is preeminent, but we cannot afford to
be complacent. In a dynamic world economy, we are seeing new
competitors, like China and India, and this creates uncertainty,
which makes it easier to feed people’s fears. So we’re seeing some
old temptations return. Protectionists want to escape competition,
pretending that we can keep our high standard of living while
walling off our economy. Others say that the government needs
to take a larger role in directing the economy, centralizing more
power in Washington and increasing taxes. We hear claims that
immigrants are somehow bad for the economy — even though this
economy could not function without them. All these are forms of
economic retreat, and they lead in the same direction — toward a
stagnant and second-rate economy.
Tonight I will set out a better path: an agenda for a nation that
————
342

competes with confidence; an agenda that will raise standards
of living and generate new jobs. Americans should not fear our
economic future, because we intend to shape it.
Keeping America competitive begins with keeping our
economy growing. And our economy grows when Americans
have more of their own money to spend, save, and invest. In the
last five years, the tax relief you passed has left $880 billion in
the hands of American workers, investors, small businesses, and
families — and they have used it to help produce more than four
years of uninterrupted economic growth. Yet the tax relief is
set to expire in the next few years. If we do nothing, American
families will face a massive tax increase they do not expect and
will not welcome. Because America needs more than a temporary
expansion, we need more than temporary tax relief. I urge the
Congress to act responsibly, and make the tax cuts permanent.
Keeping America competitive requires us to be good stewards
of tax dollars. Every year of my presidency, we’ve reduced the
growth of non-security discretionary spending, and last year you
passed bills that cut this spending. This year my budget will cut
it again, and reduce or eliminate more than 140 programs that are
performing poorly or not fulfilling essential priorities. By passing
these reforms, we will save the American taxpayer another $14
billion next year, and stay on track to cut the deficit in half by
2009.
I am pleased that members of Congress are working on
earmark reform, because the federal budget has too many special
interest projects. And we can tackle this problem together, if you
pass the line-item veto.
We must also confront the larger challenge of mandatory
spending, or entitlements. This year, the first of about 78 million
baby boomers turn 60, including two of my Dad’s favorite people
— me and President Clinton. This milestone is more than a
personal crisis, it is a national challenge. The retirement of the
baby boom generation will put unprecedented strains on the federal
government. By 2030, spending for Social Security, Medicare
————
343

and Medicaid alone will be almost 60 percent of the entire federal
budget. And that will present future Congresses with impossible
choices — staggering tax increases, immense deficits, or deep cuts
in every category of spending. Congress did not act last year on my
proposal to save Social Security, yet the rising cost of entitlements
is a problem that is not going away. And every year we fail to act,
the situation gets worse.
So tonight, I ask you to join me in creating a commission
to examine the full impact of baby boom retirements on Social
Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. This commission should include
members of Congress of both parties, and offer bipartisan solutions.
We need to put aside partisan politics and work together and get this
problem solved.
Keeping America competitive requires us to open more markets
for all that Americans make and grow. One out of every five factory
jobs in America is related to global trade, and we want people
everywhere to buy American. With open markets and a level
playing field, no one can out-produce or out-compete the American
worker.
Keeping America competitive requires an immigration system
that upholds our laws, reflects our values, and serves the interests
of our economy. Our nation needs orderly and secure borders. To
meet this goal, we must have stronger immigration enforcement
and border protection. And we must have a rational, humane guest
worker program that rejects amnesty, allows temporary jobs for
people who seek them legally, and reduces smuggling and crime at
the border.
Keeping America competitive requires affordable health care.
Our government has a responsibility to provide health care for the
poor and the elderly, and we are meeting that responsibility. For all
Americans — for all Americans, we must confront the rising cost
of care, strengthen the doctor-patient relationship, and help people
afford the insurance coverage they need.
We will make wider use of electronic records and other
health information technology, to help control costs and reduce
————
344

dangerous medical errors. We will strengthen health savings
accounts — making sure individuals and small business employees
can buy insurance with the same advantages that people working
for big businesses now get. We will do more to make this
coverage portable, so workers can switch jobs without having to
worry about losing their health insurance. And because lawsuits
are driving many good doctors out of practice — leaving women
in nearly 1,500 American counties without a single OB/GYN — I
ask the Congress to pass medical liability reform this year.
Keeping America competitive requires affordable energy. And
here we have a serious problem: America is addicted to oil, which
is often imported from unstable parts of the world. The best way
to break this addiction is through technology. Since 2001, we have
spent nearly $10 billion to develop cleaner, cheaper, and more
reliable alternative energy sources — and we are on the threshold
of incredible advances.
So tonight, I announce the Advanced Energy Initiative — a
22-percent increase in clean-energy research — at the Department
of Energy, to push for breakthroughs in two vital areas. To change
how we power our homes and offices, we will invest more in
zero-emission coal-fired plants, revolutionary solar and wind
technologies, and clean, safe nuclear energy.
We must also change how we power our automobiles.
We will increase our research in better batteries for hybrid and
electric cars, and in pollution-free cars that run on hydrogen. We’ll
also fund additional research in cutting-edge methods of producing
ethanol, not just from corn, but from wood chips and stalks,
or switch grass. Our goal is to make this new kind of ethanol
practical and competitive within six years.
Breakthroughs on this and other new technologies will help us
reach another great goal: to replace more than 75 percent of our oil
imports from the Middle East by 2025. By applying the talent and
technology of America, this country can dramatically improve our
environment, move beyond a petroleum-based economy, and make
our dependence on Middle Eastern oil a thing of the past.
————
345

And to keep America competitive, one commitment is
necessary above all: We must continue to lead the world in human
talent and creativity. Our greatest advantage in the world has
always been our educated, hardworking, ambitious people — and
we’re going to keep that edge. Tonight I announce an American
Competitiveness Initiative, to encourage innovation throughout
our economy, and to give our nation’s children a firm grounding in
math and science.
First, I propose to double the federal commitment to the most
critical basic research programs in the physical sciences over the
next 10 years. This funding will support the work of America’s
most creative minds as they explore promising areas such as
nanotechnology, supercomputing, and alternative energy sources.
Second, I propose to make permanent the research and
development tax credit to encourage bolder private-sector
initiatives in technology. With more research in both the public and
private sectors, we will improve our quality of life — and ensure
that America will lead the world in opportunity and innovation for
decades to come.
Third, we need to encourage children to take more math and
science, and to make sure those courses are rigorous enough
to compete with other nations. We’ve made a good start in the
early grades with the No Child Left Behind Act, which is raising
standards and lifting test scores across our country. Tonight I
propose to train 70,000 high school teachers to lead advancedplacement courses in math and science, bring 30,000 math and
science professionals to teach in classrooms, and give early help to
students who struggle with math, so they have a better chance at
good, high-wage jobs. If we ensure that America’s children succeed
in life, they will ensure that America succeeds in the world.
Preparing our nation to compete in the world is a goal that all of
us can share. I urge you to support the American Competitiveness
Initiative, and together we will show the world what the American
people can achieve.
America is a great force for freedom and prosperity. Yet our
————
346

greatness is not measured in power or luxuries, but by who we are
and how we treat one another. So we strive to be a compassionate,
decent, hopeful society.
In recent years, America has become a more hopeful nation.
Violent crime rates have fallen to their lowest levels since the
1970s. Welfare cases have dropped by more than half over the past
decade. Drug use among youth is down 19 percent since 2001.
There are fewer abortions in America than at any point in the last
three decades, and the number of children born to teenage mothers
has been falling for a dozen years in a row.
These gains are evidence of a quiet transformation — a
revolution of conscience, in which a rising generation is finding
that a life of personal responsibility is a life of fulfillment.
Government has played a role. Wise policies, such as welfare
reform and drug education and support for abstinence and
adoption have made a difference in the character of our country.
And everyone here tonight, Democrat and Republican, has a right
to be proud of this record.
Yet many Americans, especially parents, still have deep
concerns about the direction of our culture, and the health of our
most basic institutions. They’re concerned about unethical conduct
by public officials, and discouraged by activist courts that try to
redefine marriage. They worry about children in our society who
need direction and love, and about fellow citizens still displaced by
natural disaster, and about suffering caused by treatable diseases.
As we look at these challenges, we must never give in to the
belief that America is in decline, or that our culture is doomed
to unravel. The American people know better than that. We have
proven the pessimists wrong before — and we will do it again.
A hopeful society depends on courts that deliver equal
justice under the law. The Supreme Court now has two superb
new members — new members on its bench: Chief Justice John
Roberts and Justice Sam Alito. I thank the Senate for confirming
both of them. I will continue to nominate men and women who
understand that judges must be servants of the law, and not
————
347

legislate from the bench.
Today marks the official retirement of a very special American.
For 24 years of faithful service to our nation, the United States is
grateful to Justice Sandra Day O’Connor.
A hopeful society has institutions of science and medicine that
do not cut ethical corners, and that recognize the matchless value
of every life. Tonight I ask you to pass legislation to prohibit the
most egregious abuses of medical research: human cloning in all
its forms, creating or implanting embryos for experiments, creating
human-animal hybrids, and buying, selling, or patenting human
embryos. Human life is a gift from our Creator — and that gift
should never be discarded, devalued or put up for sale.
A hopeful society expects elected officials to uphold the public
trust. Honorable people in both parties are working on reforms
to strengthen the ethical standards of Washington — I support
your efforts. Each of us has made a pledge to be worthy of public
responsibility — and that is a pledge we must never forget, never
dismiss, and never betray.
As we renew the promise of our institutions, let us also show
the character of America in our compassion and care for one
another.
A hopeful society gives special attention to children who lack
direction and love. Through the Helping America’s Youth
Initiative, we are encouraging caring adults to get involved in the
life of a child — and this good work is being led by our First Lady,
Laura Bush. This year we will add resources to encourage young
people to stay in school, so more of America’s youth can raise their
sights and achieve their dreams.
A hopeful society comes to the aid of fellow citizens in times
of suffering and emergency — and stays at it until they’re back
on their feet. So far the federal government has committed $85
billion to the people of the Gulf Coast and New Orleans. We’re
removing debris and repairing highways and rebuilding stronger
levees. We’re providing business loans and housing assistance. Yet
as we meet these immediate needs, we must also address deeper
challenges that existed before the storm arrived.
In New Orleans and in other places, many of our fellow citizens
have felt excluded from the promise of our country. The answer is
not only temporary relief, but schools that teach every child, and
job skills that bring upward mobility, and more opportunities to
own a home and start a business. As we recover from a disaster,
let us also work for the day when all Americans are protected by
justice, equal in hope, and rich in opportunity.
A hopeful society acts boldly to fight diseases like HIV/AIDS,
which can be prevented, and treated, and defeated. More than
a million Americans live with HIV, and half of all AIDS cases
occur among African Americans. I ask Congress to reform and
reauthorize the Ryan White Act, and provide new funding to states,
so we end the waiting lists for AIDS medicines in America. We
will also lead a nationwide effort, working closely with African
American churches and faith-based groups, to deliver rapid HIV
tests to millions, end the stigma of AIDS, and come closer to the
day when there are no new infections in America.
Fellow citizens, we’ve been called to leadership in a period
of consequence. We’ve entered a great ideological conflict we did
nothing to invite. We see great changes in science and commerce
that will influence all our lives. Sometimes it can seem that
history is turning in a wide arc, toward an unknown shore. Yet the
destination of history is determined by human action, and every
great movement of history comes to a point of choosing.
Lincoln could have accepted peace at the cost of disunity and
continued slavery. Martin Luther King could have stopped at
Birmingham or at Selma, and achieved only half a victory over
segregation. The United States could have accepted the permanent
division of Europe, and been complicit in the oppression of others.
Today, having come far in our own historical journey, we must
decide: Will we turn back, or finish well?
Before history is written down in books, it is written in courage.
Like Americans before us, we will show that courage and we will
finish well. We will lead freedom’s advance. We will compete and
————
349

excel in the global economy. We will renew the defining moral
commitments of this land. And so we move forward — optimistic
about our country, faithful to its cause, and confident of the
victories to come.
May God bless America.


John, thanks. Thanks for letting me come by to say “hello.”
I’ve got something on my mind I want to share with you. First,
Happy President’s Day. It turns out most folks in Washington don’t
work on President’s Day. The only one working is the President.
I want to talk to you about the fact that I think we’re in
an important moment in history, and that we have a chance to
transform the way we power our economy and how we lead our
lives. That’s what I’m here to talk about. It’s a good place to
come to talk about it because, the truth of the matter is, in order to
seize the moment, this country has got to remain technologically
advanced.
Johnson Controls has been on the cutting edge of energy
technology and other technologies for more than a century. And the
innovators that work here and the smart folks who work here are on
the leading edge of change, and that’s why I’ve come. And there’s a
role for government to help and I want to explain that role. Before
I do, again, I want to thank you, John. I want to thank all the folks
who work for Johnson Controls. It’s not easy to host the President.
I had the honor of touring the laboratory on the other side of
town there, and it was really neat to see the engineers and the
scientists and the Ph.D.s all working hard to apply their Godgiven talents to help this country remain on the leading edge of
technology. It reminded me of one of the challenges we have in
America, and that’s to make sure a new generation of our citizens
are interested in science and engineering and physics. And part of
making sure this country is the leader in the world, we’ve got to
make sure our children are properly educated so they’ll be ready for
the jobs of the 21st century.
I want to thank Congresswoman Gwen Moore for joining us;
————
351

I appreciate you coming, nice to see you. They tell me this is your
congressional district, so it’s awfully kind of you to let two other
congress persons join us — that would be Congressman Mark
Green and Congressman Paul Ryan. Thank you both for coming.
We have eaten a lot of custard in the past. I’m still recovering, I
want you to know.
I want to thank the Speaker of the House who has joined us.
The Mayor of the great city of Milwaukee has joined us; and the
County Executive has joined us. Thank you all for coming, proud
you’re here.
By the way, it’s always important, if any of you ever run
for office, to always remember to recognize the sheriff. Sheriff
Clarke, thank you for being here, good to see you again. Thank
you.
Our economy is strong. It’s gaining steam, too. We’re now
in our fifth year of uninterrupted economic growth. Last year our
economy grew at a healthy rate of 3.5 percent, in spite of high
energy prices and devastating storms. Real after-tax income is
up nearly 8 percent per American since 2001. And that’s one of
the explanations, one of the reasons why retail sales last month
made their biggest gain in more than four years. Homeownership
is at record levels. That’s a good sign. We want people owning
things in America. More minorities own a home than ever before
in our nation’s history. America’s unemployment rate is down to
4.7 percent. That’s the lowest level since 2001. We’ve added 4.7
million new jobs over the last two-and-a-half years. We’re doing
fine.
The fundamental question is, how do we keep doing fine? The
challenge that faces us is — is how we make sure that the
economic growth today carries over for tomorrow. And that’s
what I want to talk about. In order to understand what to do
you’ve got to understand what got us to where we are today. Part
of it is keeping taxes low, by the way, and that’s exactly what I
intend to do so long as I’m the President, is keep taxes low. Part
of it is being wise about how we spend our money. Part of it is
————
352

understanding how technology plays in the future of the country.
Think back 25 years ago, in the start of the 1980s. It’s not all
that long ago, really. Some of us remember the ‘80s pretty clearly.
A lot of kind of grey-haired folks here that lived through the ‘80s.
Then most Americans used typewriters, instead of the computers.
They used payphones — you remember what those were — instead
of cell phones. They used carbon paper instead of laser printers,
bank tellers instead of ATMs, and they played the license plate
game on trips, as opposed to DVDs. Times have changed a lot in
25 years, because of technology.
We’re seeing new develops all the time — new developments
— advanced battery technology allows cell phones to last about 50
percent longer than they did just five years ago. In your laboratory
we’re seeing — firsthand seeing the progress being made because
of your scientists and engineers in lighter, more potent battery
technology. Lightweight parts and better engines allow cars to
travel 60 percent farther on a gallon of gas than they did three
decades ago.
Technologies are helping this economy become more efficient.
Listen to this: Over the last 30 years our economy has grown three
times faster than our energy consumption. The economy has grown
three times faster than energy consumption. During that period
of time, we created 56 million jobs, while cutting air pollution
by 50 percent. Technology is really important for the future of
this country. And so in the State of the Union, I said that by using
technology, we can help make sure this country remains a world
leader. And that starts with making sure we change our energy
habits.
I know it came as a shock to some to hear a Texan stand up
there in front of the country and say, we’ve got a real problem,
America is addicted to oil. But I meant it, because it’s a true fact,
and we’ve got to do something about it now. Oil is the primary
source of gasoline; it is the primary source of diesel; it is the
primary source of jet fuel. And that means that oil accounts for
virtually all energy consumption in the vital transportation sector of
————
353

our economy.
The oil we consume in this important sector comes from foreign
countries, most of it does. In 1985, three-quarters of the crude oil
used in U.S. refineries came from America; today that equation
has changed dramatically. Less than half the crude oil used in our
refineries is produced here at home, 60 percent comes from foreign
countries. Things have changed since 1985.
Some of the nations we rely on for oil have unstable
governments, or fundamental differences with the United States.
These countries know we need their oil and that reduces influence.
It creates a national security issue when we’re held hostage for
energy by foreign nations that may not like us.
Energy is also part of our economic security, as well. That’s
obvious. I mean, the global demand for oil has been rising faster
than supply because there’s new economies that are beginning to
gin up, new economies growing, like China and India. Oil prices
rise sharply when demand is greater than supply. And when they
do, it strains your budgets. It hurts our families, it hurts our small
entrepreneurs. It’s like a hidden tax. And so we’re vulnerable to
high prices of oil, and we’re vulnerable to sudden disruptions of oil.
What I’m telling you is oil — the dependence upon oil is a national
security problem, and an economic security problem. And here’s
what we intend to do about it.
First, Congress passed a good energy bill last summer; I was
pleased to sign it. It took a little bit of work. It’s kind of hard to get
things done in Washington, there’s a lot of sharp partisan elbows up
there these days. But we got something done, and it’s a good bill.
It encourages conservation and new technologies and alternative
sources of energy. But there’s a lot more that needs to be done.
The first thing that needs to be done is to make sure that
there’s an incentive for private business to invest in research
and development. If technology is going to help us change our
energy habits and change the way we live, it makes sense for the
government to incent people to invest in research and development.
Right now we’ve got what we call a research and development
————
354

tax credit, which is a major incentive for private companies such
as yourselves, to invest in research and development, which will
yield new technologies. The problem is, is that the R&D tax credit
expires. As a matter of fact, they’ve only renewed it on an annual
basis.
Now, I don’t know how in the heck Congress thinks that
people can plan properly if they’re uncertain as to whether or not
the tax credit is going to exist. So, therefore, if we want to be on the
leading edge of research and development, then Congress needs to
make the R&D tax credit a permanent part of the tax code.
Secondly, government can help. Government provides about a
third of the dollars for research and development. Two-thirds come
from the private sector, one-third comes from the government. And
so I propose to double the federal commitment to the most critical
basic research programs in the physical sciences over the next
decade.
Let me explain our strategy when it comes to energy. So in
other words, part of our strategy is to make sure people continue
to invest. The research you’re doing at Johnson Labs will change
people’s lives appreciably. But we’ve got to continue to make sure
we conduct research and development if we want to be a leader
in the world. If we don’t want to be a leader in the world, fine,
we’ll just quit. That’s not how I view America. I want America to
lead the world, because by leading the world when it comes to the
economy, we’re helping our people, we’re making our people more
productive and productivity increases enhance standard of living.
And increased standards of living means the American people are
doing better.
Now, I laid out what’s called an Advanced Energy Initiative.
And a cornerstone of the initiative is a 22 percent increase in
funding for clean energy research at the Department of Energy. And
it’s got two major goals, or two objectives. First, to transform the
way we power our cars and trucks. And, secondly, to transform the
way we power our homes and offices.
So let me talk to you about the first one. Our nation is on the
————
355

threshold of some new energy technologies that I think will startle
the American people. It’s not going to startle you here at Johnson
Controls because you know what I’m talking about. You take it for
granted. But the American people will be amazed at how far our
technology has advanced in order to meet an important goal, which
is to reduce our imports from the Middle East by 75 percent by
2025, and eventually getting rid of our dependence totally.
The first objective is to change the way we power our cars
and trucks. Today’s cars and trucks are fueled almost exclusively
by gasoline and diesel fuel, which, of course, comes from oil. To
transform the way we power the vehicles, we have got to diversify
away from oil. I just gave you a reason from a national security
perspective, as well as economic security perspective why reliance
upon oil is not good for the United States.
And so here are three ways that we can do that, change our
reliance from oil. First, invest in new kinds of vehicles that require
much less gasoline. It’s a practical thing to do. Secondly, find new
fuels that will replace gasoline and, therefore, dependence on oil.
And, finally, develop new ways to run a car without gasoline at all.
The most promising ways to reduce gasoline consumption
quickly is through hybrid vehicles. Hybrid vehicles have both
a gasoline-powered engine and an electric battery based on
technologies that were developed by the Department of Energy.
In other words, this technology came to be because the federal
government made a research commitment. That’s why I think it’s
double — important to double research as we go down the next
decade. The gasoline engine charges the battery, which helps drive
the vehicle. And the twin sources of power allow hybrid cars and
trucks to travel about twice as far on a gallon of fuel as gasolineonly vehicles. That is a good start when something that can go twice
as far on a gallon of gasoline than the conventional vehicle can.
Hybrid vehicles are a good deal for consumers and the
American people are figuring it out. More than 200,000 hybrids
were sold in the United States last year — the highest sales on
record. There’s growing demand for hybrid automobiles. And
————
356

working with the Congress, we came up with an additional
incentive, and that is we provide a tax credit up to $3,400 per
hybrid vehicle purchaser. In other words, we want to stimulate
demand. In the marketplace when there is demand, suppliers
will meet that demand, and that’s positive, because if you can go
twice as far on a gallon of gasoline than otherwise it means we’re
becoming less dependent on oil. Hybrid vehicles on the road today
are delivering impressive gasoline savings.
But there is more to be done, and that’s why I’m here at
Johnson Controls, because engineers here are working on ways
to replace the current hybrid battery technology with advanced
lithium ion batteries that are now used in cell phones and laptops.
These batteries are lighter, they are more powerful, and they can
be recharged quickly. Using new lithium ion batteries, engineers
will be able to design the next generation of hybrid vehicles, called
plug-in hybrids, that can be recharged through a standard electrical
outlet. Start picturing what I’m talking about: you’ve got your car,
you pull in, you plug it right in the wall.
Development will make a big difference in the performance
of hybrid cars and trucks. Instead of depending on the gasoline
engine to recharge the electric battery, the plug-in hybrids will
have fully charged batteries as soon as you get in the automobile.
And that means plug-in hybrids will be able to travel much greater
distances on electricity alone, thereby saving more gas for our
consumers, thereby making us less dependent on oil.
The plug-in hybrid, they estimate, can initially go 40 miles
on electricity alone. So you’ve got a lot of folks living in cities
like Milwaukee, Wisconsin, who generally don’t drive more than
40 miles a day. Therefore, within 40 miles you’ll be on electricity
and using no gasoline. Eventually, plug-in hybrids with lithium
ion batteries will be able to get 100 miles per gallon. And now all
of a sudden you’re beginning to see the effects of this important
technology on our national security and on our economic security.
But, more important, for the pocketbook of our consumers.
Plug-in hybrids are a really important part of the strategy I’ve
————
357

announced, and we’re going to provide $31 million to speed up
research on these advanced technologies — this is a 27-percent
increase over current funding levels. In other words, we like to
— the experts tell me this is a very good chance to have major
breakthroughs and we want to accelerate those breakthroughs.
And, again, I want to thank you all for being on the leading edge of
change.
We’re also supporting the development of advanced fuels that
can replace regular gasoline. Here again I’m talking to folks who
know what I’m talking about — I’m talking about ethanol. You’ve
got a lot of it here in Wisconsin because you’ve got corn. Ethanol
is produced — primarily produced from corn; it’s blended with
gasoline to produce clean and efficient fuel. And blends with that
ethanol concentration of less than 10 percent, ethanol can be used
in any vehicle. With minor modifications — I emphasize “minor
modifications” — cars and trucks can become what we call flexfuel vehicles that run on a fuel blend called E85, which is a mix
of 85 percent ethanol and 15 percent gasoline. That’s a positive
development.
Ethanol, by the way, can be used in hybrid vehicles. So the
more ethanol we use, the less crude oil we consume. And using
ethanol has the added benefit of supporting our farmers. I like to
kind of tease in a way, but beneath the tease is serious — it will be
good one day when the President is given the crop report. It says,
“Mr. President, corn is up.” And we’re less dependent on foreign
sources of energy.
America produced a record 3.9 billion gallons of ethanol in
2005, was the record levels. That’s twice the level produced when
I got sworn in first time. There are five ethanol that plants up and
running here in Wisconsin, and more are coming. We offer a tax
credit to ethanol blenders of 51 cents per gallon. We’re committed
to ethanol. It makes sense. Ethanol benefits a lot of folks, but, most
importantly, it benefits those who are driving cars.
Now, we’re on the edge of advancing additional ethanol
production. New technology is going to make it possible to produce
————
358

ethanol from wood chips and stalks and switch grass, and other
natural materials. Researchers at the Energy Department tell me
we’re five or six years away from breakthroughs in being able to
produce fuels from those waste products. In other words, we’re
beginning to — we’re coming up with a way to make something
out of nothing. And this is important because it’s — economics are
such that it’s important to have your ethanol-producing factories or
plants close to where the product is grown.
That’s why E85 has spread throughout the Midwest, that’s
where you’re growing the corn. Pretty soon, you know, if you’re
able to grow switch grass and convert that into ethanol, then
you’re going to have availability for ethanol in other parts of the
country. I mean, there’s a lot of stuff that gets thrown away that
may be converted into fuel, but it’s not just located in one part of
the country — it’s located around the country. And one of the goals
is to make sure that ethanol is widespread. If we want to affect
our consumption of oil, we want ethanol to be readily available
for consumers outside certain parts of the — certain regions of the
country.
And so we proposed spending $150 million for government
and private research into these homegrown fuels. It’s an important
initiative. We want to provide our consumers with reasonable, costeffective ways to help us become less dependent on foreign sources
of oil.
And we’ve got another initiative that I find interesting, and it’s
important. And that is we’re spending money — your hardearned money — on research to develop a vehicle that will not
use gasoline and it won’t produce any pollution whatsoever. And
that’s through hydrogen. When hydrogen is used in a device called
a fuel cell, it can deliver enough electricity that could power a car
that emits pure water instead of exhaust fumes. It’s an exciting
new technology. We’re a ways down the road from bringing it to
fruition, but we are spending $1.2 billion over five years to research
this important opportunity.
We’re seeing some progress, by the way, when it comes to
————
359

hydrogen fuel cells. They tell me that the cost of manufacturing
hydrogen fuel cells has been cut in half, which is good. Research
is taking place. There could be a new technology available so that
when your children take their first driver’s test — or when some
of your children take their first driver’s test, they will do so in a
hydrogen-powered automobile.
And so those are three steps, three important steps, three steps
in which we can help change our driving habits. And by changing
our driving habits, we’ve changed our dependency on foreign
sources of oil.
Now, the second objective of the Advanced Energy Initiative
is to transform the way we power our homes and offices. And so
we’ve got to diversify our electricity supply is what I’m about to
— I’ll give you the bottom line first: We must diversify. Right now,
American electricity is generated by four principle sources. Coal
accounts for about 50 percent; nuclear power, about 20 percent;
natural gas about 18 percent; and renewable sources, like hydro
electric, solar and wind power account for the rest.
The most versatile of these fuels is natural gas. And there we
have a problem. We have a problem because natural gas is used for
more than just heating your homes. Natural gas is important for —
to help create fertilizer for farmers. Natural gas powers heavy duty
machinery used for manufacturing and chemical production. In
other words, there’s a lot of uses for natural gas. And, yet, natural
gas has become really popular for electricity generation in recent
years and the price has tripled recently. And these price increases
obviously affect our farmers, they affect our ranchers, they affect
our consumers.
And they affect our businesses. Businesses that rely upon
natural gas feedstocks have found that in order to stay in business
they’ve got to move their plants closer to where vast quantities of
natural gas are being discovered — and that’s not here in the United
States, that’s elsewhere.
And so we’ve got to figure out how to confront this issue. And
here’s two ways to do it. First, we’ve got to make sure that we’ve
————
360

got enough natural gas to meet our home heating and industrial
needs. And one of the best ways to secure supply is to expand
our ability to receive liquefied natural gas. It’s a super cool form
of natural gas that can be transported from overseas on tankers.
Natural gas inside of America is generally transported by pipeline.
Huge supplies of gas exist outside the reach of pipelines. And
technology is being developed that can cool the gas, they can bring
the gas over in tankers in liquefied form, de-liquefy it and put it into
our pipeline system.
The problem is, is that we didn’t have enough sites to set up
terminals to receive the LNG. And until there’s a place for the LNG
to unload, the liquefied natural gas, what I’m talking about isn’t
going to come to fruition. And so one of the things in the energy
bill that was important is it clarified federal authority to site new
receiving terminals for LNG. And that’s good. In other words, if we
need more natural gas to make sure that we take the pressure off the
heating bills, as well as meet our industrial needs, we’ve got to have
places for the liquefied natural gas to come into the country.
And the bill also did another important thing, and that is to
streamline permitting processes for on-shore natural — off — onshore, off-shore natural gas exploration. In other words, we’ve got
to make it easier and at the same time protect our environment to
make sure that we can find natural gas that fits into the pipeline to
help take the pressure off of price.
Secondly, we need to reduce our reliance on natural gas for
electricity generation. In other words, we’ve got to substitute other
forms of power for natural gas if we expect to be able to maintain a
manufacturing base that relies upon natural gas. And the best way
to do that is to expand our use of coal, nuclear power and renewable
sources of energy, like wind and solar.
Let me start with coal. Coal is by far our country’s most
abundant and affordable energy resource. It’s estimated we’ve got
more than 250 years of reserves. That’s a lot, that’s a lot. And I’m
sure you recognize this, or realize this, but in Wisconsin, when you
flip on the light switch, there’s a 75-percent chance that electricity is
————
361

generated by coal-powered plants. In other words, you use it here in
Wisconsin.
Coal has the potential to reduce our reliance on natural gas.
The problem is we’ve got to make sure that we can keep our
commitment to the environment. Coal requires investment to make
sure that we don’t pollute our air. And that’s the conundrum, that’s
the difficulty with coal. This country is — I told you we’ve reduced
our air pollution by 50 percent, in spite of the fact that our economy
has grown substantially. We want to continue that commitment.
I told folks when I was running for President the first time
around that we would invest $2 billion over 10 years to promote
clean coal technology. In other words, I believed, as did many
others, that technology will help us deal with this dilemma. And
we’re on our way, by the way, to complete the promise several years
ahead of schedule. In other words, we are committing research
dollars to see if we can’t use this abundant resource and, at the same
time, protect our environment.
The coal research has helped pioneer more effective pollution
controls. We’re helping coal plant efficiency. We’ve also
implemented new clean air regulations that use a cap and trade
system, which gives utility companies incentives to continue
investing in clean coal technology. Congress needs to pass my Clear
Skies legislation.
But we’re getting closer to an interesting, important goal — that
by continuing to invest at the federal level, as well as encourage
private investment, we will build the world’s first power plant to
run on coal that produces zero emissions by 2015. That will be a
positive development for future generations of Americans.
I’d like to talk about nuclear power. Today there are more than
100 nuclear plants in America that operate in 31 states, including
right here in Wisconsin. The plants are producing electricity safely,
and they don’t emit any air pollution or greenhouse gases. America
hasn’t ordered a nuclear plant since the 1970s, and that’s the result
of litigation — or because of litigation — and complex regulations.
It’s interesting when you think about a country like France,
————
362

however, they have built 58 plants since the 1970s; they get 78
percent of their electricity from nuclear power. It’s an interesting
contrast, isn’t it? We haven’t done anything since the ‘70s; this
country has decided to recognize the importance of having
renewable sources of energy that protect the environment, and 78
percent of their electricity comes from this form of energy. China
has eight nuclear plants in the works, by the way, and plans to build
at least 40 more over the next two decades.
I’m going to India later on — at the beginning of next month,
March 1st; I’m going to talk about a civilian nuclear power program
for India. I’ll tell you why I am in a minute, but first let’s talk about
here at home.
I think we ought to start building nuclear power plants again.
I think it makes sense to do so. Technology is such that we can do
so and say to the American people, these are safe — and they’re
important. To encourage construction of nuclear power plants,
there’s new federal risk insurance for the first six new plants that
will be built in the country. That’s part of the energy bill I signed.
This insurance helps protect the builders of these plants against
lawsuits or bureaucratic obstacles and other delays beyond their
control. In other words, there’s an incentive to say, let’s get six of
them started.
The administration has also launched what’s called Nuclear
Power 2010 Initiative. It’s a $1.1 billion partnership between the
government and industry to facilitate new plant orders. Chairman
Niles Diaz of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission is taking steps to
streamline the licensing process for new plant construction. In other
words, we’re analyzing barriers and hurdles and trying to eliminate
them so we can start this process.
If we’re trying to become less dependent on foreign sources of
oil or energy like natural gas, we want to free up our natural gas to
keep our manufacturing base intact, we need to move forward when
it comes to alternative sources like nuclear power. And there’s some
encouraging results and the mind-set is beginning to change. After
all, the mind-set needed to change; we haven’t built a plant since the
————
363

1970s. That’s a fairly long period of time.
This time last year, only two companies were seeking to build
nuclear power plants; now nine companies have expressed a new
interest in new — interest in new construction. They’re considering
as many as 19 new plants. This progress is going to help an
important goal. We’ll start building nuclear power plants again by
the end of this decade. As part of our strategy, as part of our way to
make sure that the future is bright and that America remains a leader
in the world is to understand the promise of nuclear power.
We’re also going to work with other nations to help them build
nuclear power industries. And the reason why is this is a global
world in which we live and demand for oil in China and India
affects price here in America. And so, therefore, if we can help
relieve the pressure off of demand for fossil fuels, it helps the entire
world.
And so we’ve got some challenges, however, in dealing with
this issue. And that’s why I put together what’s called a global
nuclear energy partnership. It’s a partnership that works with
countries that have got advanced nuclear energy programs, or
civilian nuclear energy programs like France and Great Britain and
Japan and Russia. And here are the objectives of the partnership.
First, supplier nations will provide fuel for non-supplier nations
so they can start up a civilian nuclear energy program. In other
words, a lot of countries don’t know how to enrich; a handful do,
and it makes sense that we share that — share the benefits of our
knowledge with others, but not share the knowledge because there’s
concern about proliferation.
One of the concerns you hear from the critics of expanding
nuclear power is all this will do to create proliferation concerns.
Well, here’s one way to address those concerns — to say, we’ll
provide the fuel for you — and we’ll collect the fuel from you,
by the way. And after we collect the fuel from you, we need to
reprocess the spent nuclear material. By reprocessing you can
continue to use the fuel base, but equally importantly, we’ll reduce
the amount of nuclear waste that needs to be stored.
————
364

So here is an initiative that affects us here at home, and an
initiative that will help others develop nuclear power so they can
generate their economic growth. We want people growing in the
world. We want people — economies to be in good shape. And we
also expect others to help us protect the environment, as well.
Another electricity source with enormous potential is solar
power. Today Americans use small amounts of solar power, mainly
to heat water or to power small consumer products like outdoor
lights. After spending some time with you all here, I’m going
over to Michigan to go to a company that manufactures thin film,
photovoltaic cells. That’s kind of a fancy word for cells that can
generate electricity directly from sunlight.
The technology — solar technology has the potential to change
the way we live and work, if you really think about it. For example,
roof makers will one day be able to create a solar roof that protects
you from the elements and, at the same time, powers your house.
And that’s what these folks are working on.
The vision is this: that you will have — that the technology will
become so efficient that you’ll become a little power generator
in your home, and that if you don’t use the energy you generate,
you’ll be able to feed it back into the electricity grid. The whole
purpose of spending money on solar power — and we intend to
spend $150 million next year in funding for both government and
private research — is to bring to market as quickly as possible
this important and impressive technology. It’s really going to help
change the way we live, we think, and we want solar power to
become competitive by 2015.
Another promising renewable is wind. You’re getting — as
Laura says, when you speak too long you’re a little windy. I’m
not saying I’m wind power, but I am telling you I recognize the
importance of wind power. More than $3 billion worth of equipment
to generate electricity from wind was installed in America last year.
In other words, it’s a new industry, it’s beginning to grow — $3
billion is a good investment, good amount of investment. Obviously,
people think there’s potential when it comes to wind energy.
————
365

About 6 percent of the continental U.S. has been identified
as highly suitable for construction of wind turbines. Some have
estimated that this area alone has the potential to supply up to
20 percent of our nation’s electricity. In other words, they’ve
identified 6 percent of the country’s landmass as a good place for
wind turbines that, if installed with the right technology, could
have a major effect on the electricity that we all use. So we’re
proposing additional money for research and development.
I think you’re beginning to get the drift of what I’m talking
about. We’re on the edge of some amazing breakthroughs —
breakthroughs all aimed at enhancing our national security and our
economic security, and the quality of life for the folks who live
here in the United States. And so, therefore, now is the time for
Congress to join me in spending this money. I think it’s a good use
of your money, to help us achieve major breakthroughs in how we
live and how we can reduce our dependency on oil. This is an issue
that Republicans and Democrats can, and must, come together on.
Think about how your children or your grandchildren may be
able to spend a President’s Day in the future. If you’re planning
a trip to visit relatives, you can plug in your hybrid car the night
before and drive the first 40 miles on your lithium ion battery.
If you’ve got more distance to go, you can fill up at your local
ethanol station. If you’re in Wisconsin, you’ll be filling it up with
corn product. In Crawford, it may just be switch grass. You may
decide to travel in a hydrogen-powered minivan, and refuel at a
station with hydrogen generated by a local nuclear power plant.
When you finally make it to where you’re going, you can sit at a
house that is lit by clean coal, or wind energy, or solar-powered
roof over your head.
We’re close. We’re close to having this vision realized in
America. And by the way, this can all be done — the whole trip
can be done without consuming a single drop of oil. It’s within
our reach. There was a lot of time when most Americans would
never have imagined that we’d be traveling long distance in our
automobile instead of a buggy, or sending emails instead of letters.
————
366

In the life of this nation we have seen incredible and rapid advances
in technology — in the history of this country.
I believe the greatest advances are yet to come. And I want
to thank the good folks here at Johnson for helping them come.
Thanks for your time. God bless.

Good evening. I’ve asked for a few minutes of your time to
discuss a matter of national importance — the reform of America’s
immigration system.
The issue of immigration stirs intense emotions, and in recent
weeks, Americans have seen those emotions on display. On the
streets of major cities, crowds have rallied in support of those in
our country illegally. At our southern border, others have organized
to stop illegal immigrants from coming in. Across the country,
Americans are trying to reconcile these contrasting images. And in
Washington, the debate over immigration reform has reached a time
of decision. Tonight, I will make it clear where I stand, and where I
want to lead our country on this vital issue.
We must begin by recognizing the problems with our
immigration system. For decades, the United States has not been in
complete control of its borders. As a result, many who want to work
in our economy have been able to sneak across our border, and
millions have stayed.
Once here, illegal immigrants live in the shadows of our
society. Many use forged documents to get jobs, and that makes
it difficult for employers to verify that the workers they hire are
legal. Illegal immigration puts pressure on public schools and
hospitals, it strains state and local budgets, and brings crime to our
communities. These are real problems. Yet we must remember that
the vast majority of illegal immigrants are decent people who work
hard, support their families, practice their faith, and lead responsible
lives. They are a part of American life, but they are beyond the
reach and protection of American law.
We’re a nation of laws, and we must enforce our laws. We’re
also a nation of immigrants, and we must uphold that tradition,
————
369

which has strengthened our country in so many ways. These are
not contradictory goals. America can be a lawful society and a
welcoming society at the same time. We will fix the problems
created by illegal immigration, and we will deliver a system that is
secure, orderly, and fair. So I support comprehensive immigration
reform that will accomplish five clear objectives.
First, the United States must secure its borders. This is a basic
responsibility of a sovereign nation. It is also an urgent requirement
of our national security. Our objective is straightforward: The
border should be open to trade and lawful immigration, and shut to
illegal immigrants, as well as criminals, drug dealers, and terrorists.
I was a governor of a state that has a 1,200-mile border with
Mexico. So I know how difficult it is to enforce the border, and
how important it is. Since I became President, we’ve increased
funding for border security by 66 percent, and expanded the Border
Patrol from about 9,000 to 12,000 agents. The men and women of
our Border Patrol are doing a fine job in difficult circumstances,
and over the past five years, they have apprehended and sent home
about six million people entering America illegally.
Despite this progress, we do not yet have full control of the
border, and I am determined to change that. Tonight I’m calling
on Congress to provide funding for dramatic improvements in
manpower and technology at the border. By the end of 2008, we’ll
increase the number of Border Patrol officers by an additional
6,000. When these new agents are deployed, we’ll have more than
doubled the size of the Border Patrol during my presidency.
At the same time, we’re launching the most technologically
advanced border security initiative in American history. We will
construct high-tech fences in urban corridors, and build new patrol
roads and barriers in rural areas. We’ll employ motion sensors,
infrared cameras, and unmanned aerial vehicles to prevent illegal
crossings. America has the best technology in the world, and we
will ensure that the Border Patrol has the technology they need to
do their job and secure our border.
Training thousands of new Border Patrol agents and bringing the
————
370

most advanced technology to the border will take time. Yet the
need to secure our border is urgent. So I’m announcing several
immediate steps to strengthen border enforcement during this period
of transition:
One way to help during this transition is to use the National
Guard. So, in coordination with governors, up to 6,000 Guard
members will be deployed to our southern border. The Border Patrol
will remain in the lead. The Guard will assist the Border Patrol by
operating surveillance systems, analyzing intelligence, installing
fences and vehicle barriers, building patrol roads, and providing
training. Guard units will not be involved in direct law enforcement
activities — that duty will be done by the Border Patrol. This
initial commitment of Guard members would last for a period of
one year. After that, the number of Guard forces will be reduced as
new Border Patrol agents and new technologies come online. It is
important for Americans to know that we have enough Guard forces
to win the war on terror, to respond to natural disasters, and to help
secure our border.
The United States is not going to militarize the southern border.
Mexico is our neighbor, and our friend. We will continue to work
cooperatively to improve security on both sides of the border, to
confront common problems like drug trafficking and crime, and to
reduce illegal immigration.
Another way to help during this period of transition is through
state and local law enforcement in our border communities. So we’ll
increase federal funding for state and local authorities assisting
the Border Patrol on targeted enforcement missions. We will give
state and local authorities the specialized training they need to help
federal officers apprehend and detain illegal immigrants. State and
local law enforcement officials are an important part of our border
security and they need to be a part of our strategy to secure our
borders.
The steps I’ve outlined will improve our ability to catch people
entering our country illegally. At the same time, we must ensure that
every illegal immigrant we catch crossing our southern border is
————
371

returned home. More than 85 percent of the illegal immigrants we
catch crossing the southern border are Mexicans, and most are sent
back home within 24 hours. But when we catch illegal immigrants
from other country [sic] it is not as easy to send them home. For
many years, the government did not have enough space in our
detention facilities to hold them while the legal process unfolded.
So most were released back into our society and asked to return for
a court date. When the date arrived, the vast majority did not show
up. This practice, called “catch and release,” is unacceptable, and
we will end it.
We’re taking several important steps to meet this goal. We’ve
expanded the number of beds in our detention facilities, and we
will continue to add more. We’ve expedited the legal process to cut
the average deportation time. And we’re making it clear to foreign
governments that they must accept back their citizens who violate
our immigration laws. As a result of these actions, we’ve ended
“catch and release” for illegal immigrants from some countries. And
I will ask Congress for additional funding and legal authority, so
we can end “catch and release” at the southern border once and for
all. When people know that they’ll be caught and sent home if they
enter our country illegally, they will be less likely to try to sneak in.
Second, to secure our border, we must create a temporary
worker program. The reality is that there are many people on the
other side of our border who will do anything to come to America
to work and build a better life. They walk across miles of desert in
the summer heat, or hide in the back of 18-wheelers to reach our
country. This creates enormous pressure on our border that walls
and patrols alone will not stop. To secure the border effectively, we
must reduce the numbers of people trying to sneak across.
Therefore, I support a temporary worker program that would
create a legal path for foreign workers to enter our country in an
orderly way, for a limited period of time. This program would
match willing foreign workers with willing American employers
for jobs Americans are not doing. Every worker who applies for the
program would be required to pass criminal background checks.
————
372

And temporary workers must return to their home country at the
conclusion of their stay.
A temporary worker program would meet the needs of our
economy, and it would give honest immigrants a way to provide
for their families while respecting the law. A temporary worker
program would reduce the appeal of human smugglers, and make
it less likely that people would risk their lives to cross the border.
It would ease the financial burden on state and local governments,
by replacing illegal workers with lawful taxpayers. And above all,
a temporary worker program would add to our security by making
certain we know who is in our country and why they are here.
Third, we need to hold employers to account for the workers
they hire. It is against the law to hire someone who is in this country
illegally. Yet businesses often cannot verify the legal status of their
employees because of the widespread problem of document fraud.
Therefore, comprehensive immigration reform must include a better
system for verifying documents and work eligibility. A key part
of that system should be a new identification card for every legal
foreign worker. This card should use biometric technology, such as
digital fingerprints, to make it tamper-proof. A tamper-proof card
would help us enforce the law, and leave employers with no excuse
for violating it. And by making it harder for illegal immigrants to
find work in our country, we would discourage people from crossing
the border illegally in the first place.
Fourth, we must face the reality that millions of illegal
immigrants are here already. They should not be given an automatic
path to citizenship. This is amnesty, and I oppose it. Amnesty would
be unfair to those who are here lawfully, and it would invite further
waves of illegal immigration.
Some in this country argue that the solution is to deport every
illegal immigrant, and that any proposal short of this amounts to
amnesty. I disagree. It is neither wise, nor realistic to round up
millions of people, many with deep roots in the United States, and
send them across the border. There is a rational middle ground
between granting an automatic path to citizenship for every illegal
————
373

immigrant, and a program of mass deportation. That middle ground
recognizes there are differences between an illegal immigrant who
crossed the border recently, and someone who has worked here
for many years, and has a home, a family, and an otherwise clean
record.
I believe that illegal immigrants who have roots in our country
and want to stay should have to pay a meaningful penalty for
breaking the law, to pay their taxes, to learn English, and to work
in a job for a number of years. People who meet these conditions
should be able to apply for citizenship, but approval would not
be automatic, and they will have to wait in line behind those who
played by the rules and followed the law. What I’ve just described
is not amnesty, it is a way for those who have broken the law to pay
their debt to society, and demonstrate the character that makes a
good citizen.
Fifth, we must honor the great American tradition of the
melting pot, which has made us one nation out of many peoples.
The success of our country depends upon helping newcomers
assimilate into our society, and embrace our common identity as
Americans. Americans are bound together by our shared ideals, an
appreciation of our history, respect for the flag we fly, and an ability
to speak and write the English language. English is also the key to
unlocking the opportunity of America. English allows newcomers
to go from picking crops to opening a grocery, from cleaning offices
to running offices, from a life of low-paying jobs to a diploma, a
career, and a home of their own. When immigrants assimilate and
advance in our society, they realize their dreams, they renew our
spirit, and they add to the unity of America.
Tonight, I want to speak directly to members of the House and
the Senate: An immigration reform bill needs to be comprehensive,
because all elements of this problem must be addressed together,
or none of them will be solved at all. The House has passed an
immigration bill. The Senate should act by the end of this month
so we can work out the differences between the two bills, and
Congress can pass a comprehensive bill for me to sign into law.
————
374

America needs to conduct this debate on immigration in a
reasoned and respectful tone. Feelings run deep on this issue, and
as we work it out, all of us need to keep some things in mind.
We cannot build a unified country by inciting people to anger, or
playing on anyone’s fears, or exploiting the issue of immigration
for political gain. We must always remember that real lives will be
affected by our debates and decisions, and that every human being
has dignity and value no matter what their citizenship papers say.
I know many of you listening tonight have a parent or a
grandparent who came here from another country with dreams of a
better life. You know what freedom meant to them, and you know
that America is a more hopeful country because of their hard work
and sacrifice. As President, I’ve had the opportunity to meet people
of many backgrounds, and hear what America means to them. On
a visit to Bethesda Naval Hospital, Laura and I met a wounded
Marine named Guadalupe Denogean. Master Gunnery Sergeant
Denogean came to the United States from Mexico when he was a
boy. He spent his summers picking crops with his family, and then
he volunteered for the United States Marine Corps as soon as he
was able. During the liberation of Iraq, Master Gunnery Sergeant
Denogean was seriously injured. And when asked if he had any
requests, he made two: a promotion for the corporal who helped
rescue him, and the chance to become an American citizen. And
when this brave Marine raised his right hand, and swore an oath to
become a citizen of the country he had defended for more than 26
years, I was honored to stand at his side.
We will always be proud to welcome people like Guadalupe
Denogean as fellow Americans. Our new immigrants are just what
they’ve always been — people willing to risk everything for the
dream of freedom. And America remains what she has always been:
the great hope on the horizon, an open door to the future, a blessed
and promised land. We honor the heritage of all who come here,
no matter where they come from, because we trust in our country’s
genius for making us all Americans — one nation under God.
Thank you, and good night.

Thank you all very much. Please be seated. Thanks for the
warm welcome. It’s great to join you here in one of America’s most
beautiful cities. I appreciate your hospitality. I’m proud to stand
before some of our country’s finest patriots, our veterans and their
families. And I’m pleased to call you my fellow Legionnaires. I
suspect I may be the only one here, though, from Post 77, Houston,
Texas. That’s what I thought. If you’re from Post 77, behave
yourself here in Salt Lake.
Laura did remind me the other night, though, that a few of
my fellow members — at least I’ve joined a few of my fellow
members in another illustrious organization, the “Over 60 Club.”
For almost 90 years, Legionnaires have stood proudly “for
God and country.” From big cities to small towns, the American
Legion name brings to mind the best of our nation — decency,
generosity, and character. I thank you for a lifetime of service. I
thank you for the positive contributions you make to our nation,
and I’m proud to join you today.
First, I want to thank Tom Bock, the National Commander,
for his kind introduction and his strong leadership. I always
am pleased to welcome the Commander to the Oval Office to
discuss common issues, and you’ve done a fine job leading this
organization, Tom. I also want to thank your wife, Elaine, and I
particularly want to pay respect to your son, Captain Bock, of the
United States Army, who’s joined us today.
I appreciate being here with Carol Van Kirk, the National
President of the American Legion Auxiliary. And I want to thank
all the Auxiliary members who are with us here today, as well.
I’m proud that the Governor of this great state, Jon Huntsman,
————
377

and his wife Mary Kaye, have joined us. Governor, thank you
for your time. I’m also proud to be joined by two United States
Senators who are strong supporters of the United States military,
Senator Orrin Hatch, and Senator Bob Bennett.
Members of the congressional delegation from the state of
Utah have joined us: Congressman Rob Bishop, and Congressman
Chris Cannon. Thank you both for coming. Proud you’re here. I
thank the state Senator, John Valentine, who is the President of
the Utah State Senate. I appreciate Speaker Greg Curtis. I want to
thank all the state and local officials who have joined us here today.
Most particularly, I want to thank you all for giving me a chance
to come and speak to you. I particularly want to thank all the Gold
Star families who have joined us today. May God bless you. May
God bless you.
As veterans, all of you stepped forward when America
needed you most. From North Africa to Normandy, Iwo Jima
to Inchon, from Khe Sanh to Kuwait, your courage and service
have made it possible for generations to live in liberty. And we
owe you more than just thanks. We owe you the support of the
federal government. And so, in my first four years as President,
we increased funding for veterans more than the previous
administration did in eight years. Since then, we’ve increased it
even more. My budget for this year provides more than $80 billion
for veterans — that’s a 75-percent increase since I took office. It’s
the highest level of support for veterans in American history.
For many veterans, health care is a top priority, and it’s a
top priority of my administration. When Congress passes my
2007 budget, we will have increased the VA health care budget
by 69 percent since 2001. We’ve extended treatment to a million
additional veterans, including more than 300,000 men and women
returning from Afghanistan and Iraq. We’re building new VA
facilities in places where veterans are retiring, so that more
veterans can get top-quality health care closer to their homes.
I appreciate the Legion’s strong history of care and
compassion for your fellow veterans. Earlier this week, I traveled
————
378

to Mississippi and Louisiana to mark the first anniversary of
Hurricane Katrina. Veterans were hit hard by this storm, and
American Legion posts all across the United States responded with
vital relief. In an hour of suffering, you showed the good heart of
our nation, and you showed the world that America can always
count on Legionnaires.
I also appreciate the Legion’s long history of supporting
wise legislation in the Nation’s Capital. Earlier this year, the Senate
voted on a constitutional amendment to ban flag desecration — we
came within a single vote of passing it. The administration looks
forward to continuing working with the American Legion to make
sure we get this important protection in the Constitution of the
United States of America.
Your organization supported another good piece of legislation
called the Respect for America’s Fallen Heroes Act. This bill
ensures that families of fallen service members will not have to
endure protests during military funerals.
My administration will also continue to work to locate the
men and women in uniform whose fate is still undetermined —
our prisoners of war and personnel missing in action. We will
not forget these brave Americans. We must not rest until we’ve
accounted for every soldier, sailor, airman, Coast Guardsman, and
Marine. And we will always honor their courage.
At this hour, a new generation of Americans in uniform is
showing great courage in defending our freedom in the first war
of the 21st century. I know that Legionnaires are following this
war closely, especially those of you with family and friends who
wear our uniform. The images that come back from the front lines
are striking, and sometimes unsettling. When you see innocent
civilians ripped apart by suicide bombs, or families buried inside
their homes, the world can seem engulfed in purposeless violence.
The truth is there is violence, but those who cause it have a clear
purpose. When terrorists murder at the World Trade Center, or car
bombers strike in Baghdad, or hijackers plot to blow up planes
over the Atlantic, or terrorist militias shoot rockets at Israeli
————
379

towns, they are all pursuing the same objective — to turn back
the advance of freedom, and impose a dark vision of tyranny and
terror across the world.
The enemies of liberty come from different parts of the
world, and they take inspiration from different sources. Some are
radicalized followers of the Sunni tradition, who swear allegiance
to terrorist organizations like al Qaeda. Others are radicalized
followers of the Shia tradition, who join groups like Hezbollah
and take guidance from state sponsors like Syria and Iran. Still
others are “homegrown” terrorists — fanatics who live quietly
in free societies they dream to destroy. Despite their differences,
these groups from — form the outlines of a single movement, a
worldwide network of radicals that use terror to kill those who
stand in the way of their totalitarian ideology. And the unifying
feature of this movement, the link that spans sectarian divisions
and local grievances, is the rigid conviction that free societies are a
threat to their twisted view of Islam.
The war we fight today is more than a military conflict; it is
the decisive ideological struggle of the 21st century. On one side
are those who believe in the values of freedom and moderation —
the right of all people to speak, and worship, and live in liberty.
And on the other side are those driven by the values of tyranny
and extremism — the right of a self-appointed few to impose their
fanatical views on all the rest. As veterans, you have seen this
kind of enemy before. They’re successors to Fascists, to Nazis,
to Communists, and other totalitarians of the 20th century. And
history shows what the outcome will be: This war will be difficult;
this war will be long; and this war will end in the defeat of the
terrorists and totalitarians, and a victory for the cause of freedom
and liberty.
We’re now approaching the fifth anniversary of the day this
war reached our shores. As the horror of that morning grows more
distant, there is a tendency to believe that the threat is receding
and this war is coming to a close. That feeling is natural and
comforting — and wrong. As we recently saw, the enemy still
————
380

wants to attack us. We’re in a war we didn’t ask for, but it’s a war
we must wage, and a war we will win.
In the coming days, I’ll deliver a series of speeches describing
the nature of our enemy in the war on terror, the insights we’ve
gained about their aims and ambitions, the successes and setbacks
we’ve experienced, and our strategy to prevail in this long war.
Today, I’ll discuss a critical aspect of this war: the struggle between
freedom and terror in the Middle East, including the battle in Iraq,
which is the central front in our fight against terrorism.
To understand the struggle unfolding in the Middle East, we
need to look at the recent history of the region. For a half- century,
America’s primary goal in the Middle East was stability. This was
understandable at the time; we were fighting the Soviet Union
in the Cold War, and it was important to support Middle Eastern
governments that rejected communism. Yet, over the decades, an
undercurrent of danger was rising in the Middle East. Much of the
region was mired in stagnation and despair. A generation of young
people grew up with little hope to improve their lives, and many
fell under the sway of radical extremism. The terrorist movement
multiplied in strength, and resentment that had simmered for years
boiled over into violence across the world.
Extremists in Iran seized American hostages. Hezbollah
terrorists murdered American troops at the Marine barracks in
Beirut and Khobar Towers in Saudi Arabia. Terrorists set off a
truck bomb at the World Trade Center. Al Qaeda blew up two U.S.
embassies in East Africa, and bombed the USS Cole. Then came
the nightmare of September the 11, 2001, when 19 hijackers killed
nearly 3,000 men, women, and children.
In the space of a single morning, it became clear that the calm
we saw in the Middle East was only a mirage. We realized that
years of pursuing stability to promote peace had left us with neither.
Instead, the lack of freedom in the Middle East made the region an
incubator for terrorist movements.
The status quo in the Middle East before September the 11th
was dangerous and unacceptable, so we’re pursuing a new strategy.
————
381

First, we’re using every element of national power to confront al
Qaeda, those who take inspiration from them, and other terrorists
who use similar tactics. We have ended the days of treating
terrorism simply as a law enforcement matter. We will stay on the
offense. We will fight the terrorists overseas so we do not have to
face them here at home.
Second, we have made it clear to all nations, if you harbor
terrorists, you are just as guilty as the terrorists; you’re an enemy
of the United States, and you will be held to account. And third,
we’ve launched a bold new agenda to defeat the ideology of the
enemy by supporting the forces of freedom in the Middle East and
beyond.
The freedom agenda is based upon our deepest ideals and
our vital interests. Americans believe that every person, of every
religion, on every continent, has the right to determine his or her
own destiny. We believe that freedom is a gift from an almighty
God, beyond any power on Earth to take away. And we also know,
by history and by logic, that promoting democracy is the surest
way to build security. Democracies don’t attack each other or
threaten the peace. Governments accountable to the voters focus
on building roads and schools — not weapons of mass destruction.
Young people who have a say in their future are less likely to
search for meaning in extremism. Citizens who can join a peaceful
political party are less likely to join a terrorist organization.
Dissidents with the freedom to protest around the clock are less
likely to blow themselves up during rush hour. And nations that
commit to freedom for their people will not support terrorists —
they will join us in defeating them.
So America has committed its influence in the world to
advancing freedom and democracy as the great alternatives to
repression and radicalism. We will take the side of democratic
leaders and reformers across the Middle East. We will support
the voices of tolerance and moderation in the Muslim world. We
stand with the mothers and fathers in every culture who want to
see their children grow up in a caring and peaceful world. And by
————
382

supporting the cause of freedom in a vital region, we’ll make our
children and our grandchildren more secure.
Over the past five years, we’ve begun to see the results of
our actions — and we have seen how our enemies respond to
the advance of liberty. In Afghanistan, we saw a vicious tyranny
that harbored the terrorists who planned the September the 11th
attacks. Within weeks, American forces were in Afghanistan.
Along with Afghan allies, we captured or killed hundreds of al
Qaeda and Taliban fighters; we closed down their training camps,
and we helped the people of Afghanistan replace the Taliban with a
democratic government that answers to them.
Our enemies saw the transformation in Afghanistan, and
they’ve responded by trying to roll back all the progress. Al Qaeda
and the Taliban lost a coveted base in Afghanistan and they know
they will never reclaim it when democracy succeeds. And so
they’re trying to return to power by attacking Afghanistan’s free
institutions. And they will fail. Forces from 40 nations, including
every member of NATO, are now serving alongside American
troops to support the new Afghan government. The days of the
Taliban are over. The future of Afghanistan belongs to the people
of Afghanistan. And the future of Afghanistan belongs to freedom.
In Lebanon, we saw a sovereign nation occupied by the Syrian
dictatorship. We also saw the courageous people of Lebanon
take to the streets to demand their independence. So we worked
to enforce a United Nations resolution that required Syria to end
its occupation of the country. The Syrians withdrew their armed
forces, and the Lebanese people elected a democratic government
that began to reclaim their country.
Our enemies saw the transformation in Lebanon and set out to
destabilize the young democracy. Hezbollah launched an
unprovoked attack on Israel that undermined the democrat
government in Beirut. Yet their brazen action caused the world
to unite in support for Lebanon’s democracy. Secretary Rice
worked with the Security Council to pass Resolution 1701, which
will strengthen Lebanese forces as they take control of southern
————
383

Lebanon — and stop Hezbollah from acting as a state within a
state.
I appreciate the troops pledged by France and Italy and other
allies for this important international deployment. Together, we’re
going to make it clear to the world that foreign forces and terrorists
have no place in a free and democratic Lebanon.
This summer’s crisis in Lebanon has made it clearer than ever
that the world now faces a grave threat from the radical regime
in Iran. The Iranian regime arms, funds, and advises Hezbollah,
which has killed more Americans than any terrorist network except
al Qaeda. The Iranian regime interferes in Iraq by sponsoring
terrorists and insurgents, empowering unlawful militias, and
supplying components for improvised explosive devices. The
Iranian regime denies basic human rights to millions of its people.
And the Iranian regime is pursuing nuclear weapons in open
defiance of its international obligations.
We know the death and suffering that Iran’s sponsorship of
terrorists has brought, and we can imagine how much worse it
would be if Iran were allowed to acquire nuclear weapons. Many
nations are working together to solve this problem. The United
Nations passed a resolution demanding that Iran suspend its
nuclear enrichment activities. Today is the deadline for Iran’s
leaders to reply to the reasonable proposal the international
community has made. If Iran’s leaders accept this offer and
abandon their nuclear weapons ambitions, they can set their
country on a better course. Yet, so far, the Iranian regime has
responded with further defiance and delay. It is time for Iran to
make a choice. We’ve made our choice: We will continue to work
closely with our allies to find a diplomatic solution — but there
must be consequences for Iran’s defiance, and we must not allow
Iran to develop a nuclear weapon.
In Iraq, we saw a dictator who harbored terrorists, fired at
military planes, paid the families of Palestinian suicide bombers,
invaded a neighbor, and pursued and used weapons of mass
destruction. The United Nations passed more than a dozen
————
384

resolutions demanding that Saddam Hussein fully and openly
abandon his weapons of mass destruction. We gave him a last
chance to comply — and when he refused, we enforced the just
demands of the world. And now Saddam Hussein is in prison and
on trial. Soon he will have the justice he denied to so many for so
long. And with this tyrant gone from power, the United States,
Iraq, the Middle East, and the world are better off.
In the three years since Saddam’s fall the Iraqi people have
reclaimed sovereignty of their country. They cast their ballots in
free elections. They drafted and approved a democratic constitution
and elected a constitutional democracy at the heart of the Middle
East. Over the same period, Iraq has seen a rise of terrorist and
insurgent movements that use brutal and indiscriminate violence
to frustrate the desire of the Iraqi people for freedom and peace.
Al Qaeda terrorists, former elements of Saddam’s regime, illegal
militias and unlawful armed groups are all working to undermine
Iraq’s new democracy. These groups have different long-term
ambitions, but the same immediate goals. They want to drive
America and our coalition out of Iraq and the Middle East, so they
can stop the advance of freedom and impose their dark vision on
the people of the Middle East.
Our enemies in Iraq have employed ruthless tactics to achieve
those goals. They’ve targeted American and coalition troops
with ambushes and roadside bombs. They’ve taken hostage and
beheaded civilians on camera. They’ve blown up Iraqi army
posts and assassinated government leaders. We’ve adapted to the
tactics — and thanks to the skill and professionalism of Iraqi and
American forces, many of these enemies have met their end. At
every step along the way, our enemies have failed to break the
courage of the Iraqi people; they have failed to stop the rise of
Iraqi democracy — and they will fail in breaking the will of the
American people.
Now these enemies have launched a new effort. They have
embarked on a bloody campaign of sectarian violence, which they
hope will plunge Iraq into a civil war. The outbreak of sectarian
————
385

violence was encouraged by the terrorist Zarqawi, al Qaeda’s man
in Iraq who called for an “all-out war” on Iraqi Shia. The Shia
community resisted the impulse to seek revenge for a while. But
after this February bombing of the Shia Golden Dome Mosque in
Samarra, extremist groups mobilized and sectarian death squads
formed on the streets of Baghdad and other areas. Our Ambassador
reports that thousands of Iraqis were murdered in Baghdad last
month, and large numbers of them were victims of sectarian
violence.
This cruelty and carnage has led some to question whether Iraq
has descended into civil war. Our commanders and our diplomats
on the ground in Iraq believe that’s not the case. They report that
only a small number of Iraqis are engaged in sectarian violence,
while the overwhelming majority want peace and a normal life in
a unified country. Iraqi leaders from all backgrounds remember the
elections that brought them to power, in which 12 million Iraqis
defied the car bombers and killers to claim, “We want to be free.”
Iraq’s government is working tirelessly to hold the nation
together and to heal Iraq’s divisions, not to exploit them. The
Iraqi people have come a long way. They are not going to let their
country fall apart or relapse into tyranny. As Prime Minister Maliki
told the United States Congress, “Iraqis have tasted freedom and
we will defend it absolutely.”
America has a clear strategy to help the Iraqi people protect
their new freedom, and build a democracy that can govern itself,
and sustain itself, and defend itself. On the political side, we’re
working closely with Prime Minister Maliki to strengthen Iraq’s
unity government and develop — and to deliver better services
to the Iraqi people. This is a crucial moment for the new Iraqi
government; its leaders understand the challenge. They believe
that now is the time to hammer out compromises on Iraq’s most
contentious issues.
I’ve been clear with each Iraqi leader I meet: America is a
patient nation, and Iraq can count on our partnership, as long as the
new government continues to make the hard decisions necessary
————
386

to advance a unified, democratic and peaceful Iraq. Prime Minister
Maliki has shown courage in laying out an agenda to do just that —
and he can count on an ally, the United States of America, to help
him promote this agenda.
On the security side, we’re refining our tactics to meet the
threats on the ground. I’ve given our commanders in Iraq all the
flexibility they need to make adjustments necessary to stay on
the offense and defeat the enemies of freedom. We’ve deployed
Special Operation forces to kill or capture terrorists operating in
Iraq. Zarqawi found out what they can do. We continue to train
Iraqi police forces to defend their own nation. We’ve handed over
security responsibility for a southern province to Iraqi forces. Five
of Iraq’s 10 army divisions are now taking the lead in their areas
of operation. The Iraqi security forces are determined; they’re
becoming more capable; and together, we will defeat the enemies
of a free Iraq.
Recently, we also launched a major new campaign to end the
security crisis in Baghdad. Side by side, Iraqi and American forces
are conducting operations in the city’s most violent areas to disrupt
al Qaeda, to capture enemy fighters, crack down on IED makers,
and break up the death squads. These forces are helping Iraq’s
national police force undergo retraining to better enforce law in
Baghdad. And these forces are supporting the Iraqi government as
it provides reconstruction assistance.
The Baghdad Security Plan is still in its early stages. We cannot
expect immediate success. Yet, the initial results are encouraging.
According to one military report, a Sunni man in a diverse Baghdad
neighborhood said this about the Shia soldiers on patrol: “Their
image has changed. Now you feel they’re there to protect you.”
Over the coming weeks and months, the operation will expand
throughout Baghdad. until Iraq’s democratic government is in full
control of its capital. The work is difficult and dangerous, but the
Iraqi government and their forces are determined to reclaim their
country. And the United States is determined to help them succeed.
Here at home we have a choice to make about Iraq. Some
————
387

politicians look at our efforts in Iraq and see a diversion from the
war on terror. That would come as news to Osama bin Laden, who
proclaimed that the “third world war is raging” in Iraq. It would
come as news to the number two man of al Qaeda, Zawahiri, who
has called the struggle in Iraq, quote, “the place for the greatest
battle.” It would come as news to the terrorists from Syria, Saudi
Arabia, Egypt, Sudan, Libya, Yemen and other countries, who have
to come to Iraq to fight the rise of democracy.
It’s hard to believe that these terrorists would make long
journeys across dangerous borders, endure heavy fighting, or
blow themse lves up in the streets of Baghdad, for a so-called
“diversion.” Some Americans didn’t support my decision to
remove Saddam Hussein; many are frustrated with the level of
violence. But we should all agree that the battle for Iraq is now
central to the ideological struggle of the 21st century. We will not
allow the terrorists to dictate the future of this century — so we
will defeat them in Iraq.
Still, there are some in our country who insist that the best
option in Iraq is to pull out, regardless of the situation on the
ground. Many of these folks are sincere and they’re patriotic, but
they could be — they could not be more wrong. If America were
to pull out before Iraq can defend itself, the consequences would
be absolutely predictable — and absolutely disastrous. We would
be handing Iraq over to our worst enemies — Saddam’s former
henchmen, armed groups with ties to Iran, and al Qaeda terrorists
from all over the world who would suddenly have a base of
operations far more valuable than Afghanistan under the Taliban.
They would have a new sanctuary to recruit and train terrorists
at the heart of the Middle East, with huge oil riches to fund their
ambitions. And we know exactly where those ambitions lead. If
we give up the fight in the streets of Baghdad, we will face the
terrorists in the streets of our own cities.
We can decide to stop fighting the terrorists in Iraq and other
parts of the world, but they will not decide to stop fighting us.
General John Abizaid, our top commander in the Middle East
————
388

region, recently put it this way: “If we leave, they will follow us.”
And he is right. The security of the civilized world depends on
victory in the war on terror, and that depends on victory in Iraq.
So the United States of America will not leave until victory is
achieved.
Victory in Iraq will be difficult and it will require more
sacrifice. The fighting there can be as fierce as it was at Omaha
Beach or Guadalcanal. And victory is as important as it was in
those earlier battles. Victory in Iraq will result in a democracy that
is a friend of America and an ally in the war on terror. Victory in
Iraq will be a crushing defeat for our enemies, who have staked so
much on the battle there. Victory in Iraq will honor the sacrifice
of the brave Americans who have given their lives. And victory
in Iraq would be a powerful triumph in the ideological struggle
of the 21st century. From Damascus to Tehran, people will look
to a democratic Iraq as inspiration that freedom can succeed in
the Middle East, and as evidence that the side of freedom is the
winning side. This is a pivotal moment for the Middle East. The
world is watching — and in Iraq and beyond, the forces of freedom
will prevail.
For all the debate, American policy in the Middle East comes
down to a straightforward choice. We can allow the Middle East
to continue on its course — on the course it was headed before
September the 11th, and a generation from now, our children will
face a region dominated by terrorist states and radical dictators
armed with nuclear weapons. Or we can stop that from happening,
by rallying the world to confront the ideology of hate, and give the
people of the Middle East a future of hope. And that is the choice
America has made.
We see a day when people across the Middle East have
governments that honor their dignity, unleash their creativity, and
count their votes. We see a day when leaders across the Middle
East reject terror and protect freedom. We see a day when the
nations of the Middle East are allies in the cause of peace. The path
to that day will be uphill and uneven, but we can be confident of
————
389

the outcome, because we know that the direction of history leads
toward freedom.
In the early years of our republic, Thomas Jefferson said
that we cannot expect to move “from despotism to liberty in a
featherbed.” That’s been true in every time and place. No one
understands that like you, our veterans, understand that. With the
distance of history, it can be easy to look back at the wars of the
20th century and see a straight path to victory. You know better
than that. You waged the hard battles, you suffered the wounds,
you lost friends and brothers. You were there for dark times and
the moments of uncertainty. And you know that freedom is always
worth the sacrifice.
You also know what it takes to win. For all that is new about
this war, one thing has not changed: Victory still depends on the
courage and the patience and the resolve of the American people.
Above all, it depends on patriots who are willing to fight for
freedom. Our nation is blessed to have these men and women in
abundance. Our military forces make this nation strong; they make
this nation safe; and they make this nation proud.
We thank them and their families for their sacrifice. We will
remember all those who have given their lives in this struggle —
and I vow that we will give our men and women in uniform all the
resources they need to accomplish their missions.
One brave American we remember is Marine Corporal Adam
Galvez, from here in Salt Lake City. Yesterday Adam’s mom and
dad laid their son to rest. We’re honored by their presence with
us today. About a month ago, Adam was wounded by a suicide
bomb in Iraq’s Anbar Province. When he regained consciousness,
he found he was buried alive, so he dug himself out of the rubble.
And then ran through gunfire to get a shovel to dig out his
fellow Marines. As soon as he recovered from his injuries, Adam
volunteered to go back to the front lines. and 11 days ago, he was
killed when a roadside bomb hit his convoy.
Here is what Adam’s mom and dad said about the cause for
which their son gave his life: “Though many are debating the
————
390

justification of this war, Adam believed in his country — Adam’s
belief in his country did not waver, even to the point of the ultimate
sacrifice. It’s our hope and our prayer that people share the same
conviction and dedication to our troops and fellow Americans.”
Our nation will always remember the selflessness and sacrifice
of Americans like Adam Galvez. We will honor their lives by
completing the good and noble work they have started. And we can
be confident that one day, veterans of the war on terror will gather
at American Legion halls across the country, and say the same
things you say: We made our nation safer; we made a region more
peaceful; and we left behind a better world for our children and our
grandchildren.
Thanks for having me. May God bless our veterans. May God
bless our troops. And may God continue to bless the United States
of America.


Thank you all very much. Thank you all. Please be seated.
General Hendrix, thank you for the invitation to be here. Thanks
for the kind introduction. I’m honored to stand with the men
and women of the Military Officers Association of America. I
appreciate the Board of Directors who are here, and the leaders
who have given me this platform from which to speak. I’m proud
to be here with active members of the United States military.
Thank you for your service. I’m proud to be your Commander-inChief.
I am pleased also to stand with members of the diplomatic
corps, including many representing nations that have been attacked
by al Qaeda and its terrorist allies since September the 11th, 2001.
Your presence here reminds us that we’re engaged in a global war
against an enemy that threatens all civilized nations. And today the
civilized world stands together to defend our freedom; we stand
together to defeat the terrorists; and were working to secure the
peace for generations to come.
I appreciate my Attorney General joining us today, Al
Gonzales. Thank you for being here. The Secretary of Homeland
Security, Michael Chertoff, is with us. Three members of the
United States Senate — I might say, three important members of
the United States Senate — Senate President Pro Tem Ted Stevens
of Alaska. Thank you for joining us, Senator. Chairman of the
Appropriations Committee, Senator Thad Cochran of Mississippi.
The Chairman of the Armed Services Committee, John Warner of
Virginia.
I thank Norb Ryan, as well, for his leadership. I do appreciate
all the folks that are at Walter Reed who have joined us today. I’m
————
393

going to tell the parents of our troops, we provide great health care
to those who wear the uniform. I’m proud of those folks at Bethesda
and Walter Reed — are providing you the best possible care to help
you recover from your injuries. Thank you for your courage. Thank
you for joining us here today. May God bless you in your recovery.
Next week, America will mark the fifth anniversary of
September the 11th, 2001 terrorist attacks. As this day approaches,
it brings with it a flood of painful memories. We remember the
horror of watching planes fly into the World Trade Center, and
seeing the towers collapse before our eyes. We remember the
sight of the Pentagon, broken and in flames. We remember the
rescue workers who rushed into burning buildings to save lives,
knowing they might never emerge again. We remember the brave
passengers who charged the cockpit of their hijacked plane, and
stopped the terrorists from reaching their target and killing more
innocent civilians. We remember the cold brutality of the enemy
who inflicted this harm on our country — an enemy whose leader,
Osama bin Laden, declared the massacre of nearly 3,000 people that
day — I quote — “an unparalleled and magnificent feat of valor,
unmatched by any in humankind before them.”
In five years since our nation was attacked, al Qaeda and
terrorists it has inspired have continued to attack across the world.
They’ve killed the innocent in Europe and Africa and the Middle
East, in Central Asia and the Far East, and beyond. Most recently,
they attempted to strike again in the most ambitious plot since the
attacks of September the 11th — a plan to blow up passenger planes
headed for America over the Atlantic Ocean.
Five years after our nation was attacked, the terrorist danger
remains. We’re a nation at war — and America and her allies are
fighting this war with relentless determination across the world.
Together with our coalition partners, we’ve removed terrorist
sanctuaries, disrupted their finances, killed and captured key
operatives, broken up terrorist cells in America and other nations,
and stopped new attacks before they’re carried out. We’re on the
offense against the terrorists on every battlefront — and we’ll
————
394

accept nothing less than complete victory.
In the five years since our nation was attacked, we’ve also
learned a great deal about the enemy we face in this war. We’ve
learned about them through videos and audio recordings, and letters
and statements they’ve posted on websites. We’ve learned about
them from captured enemy documents that the terrorists have never
meant for us to see. Together, these documents and statements
have given us clear insight into the mind of our enemies — their
ideology, their ambitions, and their strategy to defeat us.
We know what the terrorists intend to do because they’ve told us
— and we need to take their words seriously. So today I’m going to
describe — in the terrorists’ own words, what they believe… what
they hope to accomplish, and how they intend to accomplish it. I’ll
discuss how the enemy has adapted in the wake of our sustained
offensive against them, and the threat posed by different strains of
violent Islamic radicalism. I’ll explain the strategy we’re pursuing
to protect America, by defeating the terrorists on the battlefield, and
defeating their hateful ideology in the battle of ideas.
The terrorists who attacked us on September the 11th, 2001,
are men without conscience — but they’re not madmen. They kill
in the name of a clear and focused ideology, a set of beliefs that
are evil, but not insane. These al Qaeda terrorists and those who
share their ideology are violent Sunni extremists. They’re driven
by a radical and perverted vision of Islam that rejects tolerance,
crushes all dissent, and justifies the murder of innocent men,
women and children in the pursuit of political power. They hope to
establish a violent political utopia across the Middle East, which
they call a “Caliphate” — where all would be ruled according to
their hateful ideology. Osama bin Laden has called the 9/11 attacks
— in his words — “a great step towards the unity of Muslims and
establishing the Righteous… [Caliphate].”
This caliphate would be a totalitarian Islamic empire
encompassing all current and former Muslim lands, stretching from
Europe to North Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia. We
know this because al Qaeda has told us. About two months ago,
————
395

the terrorist Zawahiri — he’s al Qaeda’s second in command —
declared that al Qaeda intends to impose its rule in “every land
that was a home for Islam, from [Spain] to Iraq. He went on to say,
“The whole world is an open field for us.”
We know what this radical empire would look like in practice,
because we saw how the radicals imposed their ideology on the
people of Afghanistan. Under the rule of the Taliban and al Qaeda,
Afghanistan was a totalitarian nightmare — a land where women
were imprisoned in their homes, men were beaten for missing
prayer meetings, girls could not go to school, and children were
forbidden the smallest pleasures like flying kites. Religious police
roamed the streets, beating and detaining civilians for perceived
offenses. Women were publicly whipped. Summary executions
were held in Kabul’s soccer stadium in front of cheering mobs. And
Afghanistan was turned into a launching pad for horrific attacks
against America and other parts of the civilized world — including
many Muslim nations.
The goal of these Sunni extremists is to remake the entire
Muslim world in their radical image. In pursuit of their imperial
aims, these extremists say there can be no compromise or dialogue
with those they call “infidels” — a category that includes America,
the world’s free nations, Jews, and all Muslims who reject their
extreme vision of Islam. They reject the possibility of peaceful
coexistence with the free world. Again, hear the words of Osama
bin Laden earlier this year: “Death is better than living on this
Earth with the unbelievers among us.”
These radicals have declared their uncompromising hostility
to freedom. It is foolish to think that you can negotiate with
them. We see the uncompromising nature of the enemy in many
captured terrorist documents. Here are just two examples: After
the liberation of Afghanistan, coalition forces searching through
a terrorist safe house in that country found a copy of the al Qaeda
charter. This charter states that “there will be continuing enmity
until everyone believes in Allah. We will not meet [the enemy]
halfway. There will be no room for dialogue with them.” Another
————
396

document was found in 2000 by British police during an antiterrorist raid in London — a grisly al Qaeda manual that includes
chapters with titles such as “Guidelines for Beating and Killing
Hostages.” This manual declares that their vision of Islam “does
not… make a truce with unbelief, but rather confronts it.” The
confrontation… calls for… the dialogue of bullets, the ideals of
assassination, bombing, and destruction, and the diplomacy of the
cannon and machine gun.”
Still other captured documents show al Qaeda’s strategy for
infiltrating Muslim nations, establishing terrorist enclaves,
overthrowing governments, and building their totalitarian empire.
We see this strategy laid out in a captured al Qaeda document found
during a recent raid in Iraq, which describes their plans to infiltrate
and take over Iraq’s western Anbar Province. The document lays
out an elaborate al Qaeda governing structure for the region that
includes an Education Department, a Social Services Department,
a Justice Department, and an “Execution Unit” responsible for
“Sorting out, Arrest, Murder, and Destruction.”
According to their public statements, countries that have — they
have targeted stretch from the Middle East to Africa, to Southeast
Asia. Through this strategy, al Qaeda and its allies intend to create
numerous, decentralized operating bases across the world, from
which they can plan new attacks, and advance their vision of a
unified, totalitarian Islamic state that can confront and eventually
destroy the free world.
These violent extremists know that to realize this vision, they
must first drive out the main obstacle that stands in their way — the
United States of America. According to al Qaeda, their strategy to
defeat America has two parts: First, they’re waging a campaign of
terror across the world. They’re targeting our forces abroad, hoping
that the American people will grow tired of casualties and give up
the fight. And they’re targeting America’s financial centers and
economic infrastructure at home, hoping to terrorize us and cause
our economy to collapse.
Bin Laden calls this his “bleed-until-bankruptcy plan.” And he
————
397

cited the attacks of 9/11 as evidence that such a plan can succeed.
With the 9/11 attacks, Osama bin Laden says, “al Qaeda spent
$500,000 on the event, while America… lost — according to the
lowest estimate — $500 billion… Meaning that every dollar of al
Qaeda defeated a million dollars” of America. Bin Laden concludes
from this experience that “America is definitely a great power,
with… unbelievable military strength and a vibrant economy, but
all of these have been built on a very weak and hollow foundation.”
He went on to say, “Therefore, it is very easy to target the flimsy
base and concentrate on their weak points, and even if we’re able to
target one-tenth of these weak points, we will be able [to] crush and
destroy them.”
Secondly, along with this campaign of terror, the enemy
has a propaganda strategy. Osama bin Laden laid out this strategy
in a letter to the Taliban leader, Mullah Omar, that coalition
forces uncovered in Afghanistan in 2002. In it, bin Laden says
that al Qaeda intends to “[launch],” in his words, “a media
campaign… to create a wedge between the American people and
their government.” This media campaign, bin Laden says, will
send the American people a number of messages, including “that
their government [will] bring them more losses, in finances and
casualties.” And he goes on to say that “they are being sacrificed…
to serve… the big investors, especially the Jews.” Bin Laden says
that by delivering these messages, al Qaeda “aims at creating
pressure from the American people on the American government to
stop their campaign against Afghanistan.”
Bin Laden and his allies are absolutely convinced they can
succeed in forcing America to retreat and causing our economic
collapse. They believe our nation is weak and decadent, and lacking
in patience and resolve. And they’re wrong. Osama bin Laden has
written that the “defeat of... American forces in Beirut” in 1983 is
proof America does not have the stomach to stay in the fight. He’s
declared that “in Somalia… the United States [pulled] out, trailing
disappointment, defeat, and failure behind it.” And last year, the
terrorist Zawahiri declared that Americans “know better than others
————
398

that there is no hope in victory. The Vietnam specter is closing every
outlet.”
These terrorists hope to drive America and our coalition
out of Afghanistan, so they can restore the safe haven they lost
when coalition forces drove them out five years ago. But they’ve
made clear that the most important front in their struggle against
America is Iraq — the nation bin Laden has declared the “capital
of the Caliphate.” Hear the words of bin Laden: “I now address…
the whole… Islamic nation: Listen and understand… The most…
serious issue today for the whole world is this Third World War…
[that] is raging in [Iraq].” He calls it “a war of destiny between
infidelity and Islam.” He says, “The whole world is watching
this war,” and that it will end in “victory and glory or misery and
humiliation.” For al Qaeda, Iraq is not a distraction from their war
on America — it is the central battlefield where the outcome of this
struggle will be decided.
Here is what al Qaeda says they will do if they succeed in
driving us out of Iraq: The terrorist Zawahiri has said that al Qaeda
will proceed with “several incremental goals. The first stage: Expel
the Americans from Iraq. The second stage: Establish an Islamic
authority or amirate, then develop it and support it until it achieves
the level of Caliphate… The third stage: Extend the jihad wave to
the secular countries neighboring Iraq. And the fourth stage: …the
clash with Israel.”
These evil men know that a fundamental threat to their
aspirations is a democratic Iraq that can govern itself, sustain itself,
and defend itself. They know that given a choice, the Iraqi people
will never choose to live in the totalitarian state the extremists hope
to establish. And that is why we must not, and we will not, give the
enemy victory in Iraq by deserting the Iraqi people.
Last year, the terrorist Zarqawi declared in a message posted
on the Internet that democracy “is the essence of infidelity and
deviation from the right path.” The Iraqi people disagree. Last
December, nearly 12 million Iraqis from every ethnic and religious
community turned out to vote in their country’s third free election
————
399

in less than a year. Iraq now has a unity government that represents
Iraq’s diverse population — and al Qaeda’s top commander in Iraq
breathed his last breath.
Despite these strategic setbacks, the enemy will continue to
fight freedom’s advance in Iraq, because they understand the stakes
in this war. Again, hear the words of bin Laden, in a message to
the American people earlier this year. He says: “The war is for you
or for us to win. If we win it, it means your defeat and disgrace
forever.”
Now, I know some of our country hear the terrorists’ words,
and hope that they will not, or cannot, do what they say. History
teaches that underestimating the words of evil and ambitious men
is a terrible mistake. In the early 1900s, an exiled lawyer in Europe
published a pamphlet called “What Is To Be Done?” — in which
he laid out his plan to launch a communist revolution in Russia.
The world did not heed Lenin’s words, and paid a terrible price.
The Soviet Empire he established killed tens of millions, and
brought the world to the brink of thermonuclear war. In the 1920s,
a failed Austrian painter published a book in which he explained
his intention to build an Aryan super-state in Germany and take
revenge on Europe and eradicate the Jews. The world ignored
Hitler’s words, and paid a terrible price. His Nazi regime killed
millions in the gas chambers, and set the world aflame in war,
before it was finally defeated at a terrible cost in lives.
Bin Laden and his terrorist allies have made their intentions
as clear as Lenin and Hitler before them. The question is: Will we
listen? Will we pay attention to what these evil men say? America
and our coalition partners have made our choice. We’re taking the
words of the enemy seriously. We’re on the offensive, and we will
not rest, we will not retreat, and we will not withdraw from the
fight, until this threat to civilization has been removed.
Five years into this struggle, it’s important to take stock of
what’s been accomplished — and the difficult work that remains.
Al Qaeda has been weakened by our sustained offensive against
them, and today it is harder for al Qaeda’s leaders to operate
————
400

freely, to move money, or to communicate with their operatives
and facilitators. Yet al Qaeda remains dangerous and determined.
Bin Laden and Zawahiri remain in hiding in remote regions of
this world. Al Qaeda continues to adapt in the face of our global
campaign against them. Increasingly, al Qaeda is taking advantage
of the Internet to disseminate propaganda, and to conduct “virtual
recruitment” and “virtual training” of new terrorists. Al Qaeda’s
leaders no longer need to meet face-to-face with their operatives.
They can find new suicide bombers, and facilitate new terrorist
attacks, without ever laying eyes on those they’re training,
financing, or sending to strike us.
As al Qaeda changes, the broader terrorist movement is also
changing, becoming more dispersed and self-directed. More and
more, we’re facing threats from locally established terrorist cells
that are inspired by al Qaeda’s ideology and goals, but do not
necessarily have direct links to al Qaeda, such as training and
funding. Some of these groups are made up of “homegrown”
terrorists, militant extremists who were born and educated in
Western nations, were indoctrinated by radical Islamists or
attracted to their ideology, and joined the violent extremist cause.
These locally established cells appear to be responsible for a
number of attacks and plots, including those in Madrid, and
Canada, and other countries across the world.
As we continue to fight al Qaeda and these Sunni extremists
inspired by their radical ideology, we also face the threat posed
by Shia extremists, who are learning from al Qaeda, increasing
their assertiveness, and stepping up their threats. Like the vast
majority of Sunnis, the vast majority of Shia across the world
reject the vision of extremists — and in Iraq, millions of Shia have
defied terrorist threats to vote in free elections, and have shown
their desire to live in freedom. The Shia extremists want to deny
them this right. This Shia strain of Islamic radicalism is just as
dangerous, and just as hostile to America, and just as determined
to establish its brand of hegemony across the broader Middle East.
And the Shia extremists have achieved something that al Qaeda has
————
401

so far failed to do: In 1979, they took control of a major power, the
nation of Iran, subjugating its proud people to a regime of tyranny,
and using that nation’s resources to fund the spread of terror and
pursue their radical agenda.
Like al Qaeda and the Sunni extremists, the Iranian regime
has clear aims: They want to drive America out of the region,
to destroy Israel, and to dominate the broader Middle East. To
achieve these aims, they are funding and arming terrorist groups
like Hezbollah, which allow them to attack Israel and America by
proxy. Hezbollah, the source of the current instability in Lebanon,
has killed more Americans than any terrorist organization except
al Qaeda. Unlike al Qaeda, they’ve not yet attacked the American
homeland. Yet they’re directly responsible for the murder of
hundreds of Americans abroad. It was Hezbollah that was behind
the 1983 bombing of the U.S. Marine barracks in Beirut that
killed 241 Americans. And Saudi Hezbollah was behind the
1996 bombing of Khobar Towers in Saudi Arabia that killed 19
Americans, an attack conducted by terrorists who we believe were
working with Iranian officials.
Just as we must take the words of the Sunni extremists
seriously, we must take the words of the Shia extremists seriously.
Listen to the words of Hezbollah’s leader, the terrorist Nasrallah,
who has declared his hatred of America. He says, “Let the entire
world hear me. Our hostility to the Great Satan [America] is
absolute… Regardless of how the world has changed after 11
September, Death to America will remain our reverberating and
powerful slogan: Death to America.”
Iran’s leaders, who back Hezbollah, have also declared their
absolute hostility to America. Last October, Iran’s President
declared in a speech that some people ask — in his words —
“whether a world without the United States and Zionism can
be achieved… I say that this… goal is achievable.” Less than
three months ago, Iran’s President declared to America and other
Western powers: “open your eyes and see the fate of pharaoh… if
you do not abandon the path of falsehood… your doomed destiny
————
402

will be annihilation.” Less than two months ago, he warned: “The
anger of Muslims may reach an explosion point soon. If such a day
comes… [America and the West] should know that the waves of
the blast will not remain within the boundaries of our region.” He
also delivered this message to the American people: “If you would
like to have good relations with the Iranian nation in the future…
bow down before the greatness of the Iranian nation and surrender.
If you don’t accept [to do this], the Iranian nation will… force you
to surrender and bow down.”
America will not bow down to tyrants.
The Iranian regime and its terrorist proxies have demonstrated
their willingness to kill Americans — and now the Iranian regime
is pursuing nuclear weapons. The world is working together to
prevent Iran’s regime from acquiring the tools of mass murder.
The international community has made a reasonable proposal to
Iran’s leaders, and given them the opportunity to set their nation
on a better course. So far, Iran’s leaders have rejected this offer.
Their choice is increasingly isolating the great Iranian nation from
the international community, and denying the Iranian people an
opportunity for greater economic prosperity. It’s time for Iran’s
leader to make a different choice. And we’ve made our choice.
We’ll continue to work closely with our allies to find a diplomatic
solution. The world’s free nations will not allow Iran to develop a
nuclear weapon.
The Shia and Sunni extremists represent different faces of the
same threat. They draw inspiration from different sources, but
both seek to impose a dark vision of violent Islamic radicalism
across the Middle East. They oppose the advance of freedom, and
they want to gain control of weapons of mass destruction. If they
succeed in undermining fragile democracies, like Iraq, and drive
the forces of freedom out of the region, they will have an open
field to pursue their dangerous goals. Each strain of violent Islamic
radicalism would be emboldened in their efforts to topple moderate
governments and establish terrorist safe havens.
Imagine a world in which they were able to control
————
403

governments, a world awash with oil and they would use oil
resources to punish industrialized nations. And they would use those
resources to fuel their radical agenda, and pursue and purchase
weapons of mass murder. And armed with nuclear weapons, they
would blackmail the free world, and spread their ideologies of hate,
and raise a mortal threat to the American people. If we allow them
to do this, if we retreat from Iraq, if we don’t uphold our duty to
support those who are desirous to live in liberty, 50 years from now
history will look back on our time with unforgiving clarity, and
demand to know why we did not act.
I’m not going to allow this to happen — and no future
American President can allow it either. America did not seek this
global struggle, but we’re answering history’s call with confidence
and a clear strategy. Today we’re releasing a document called
the “National Strategy for Combating Terrorism.” This is an
unclassified version of the strategy we’ve been pursuing since
September the 11th, 2001. This strategy was first released in
February 2003; it’s been updated to take into account the changing
nature of this enemy. This strategy document is posted on the White
House website — whitehouse.gov. And I urge all Americans to read
it.
Our strategy for combating terrorism has five basic elements:
First, we’re determined to prevent terrorist attacks before they
occur. So we’re taking the fight to the enemy. The best way to
protect America is to stay on the offense. Since 9/11, our coalition
has captured or killed al Qaeda managers and operatives, and scores
of other terrorists across the world. The enemy is living under
constant pressure, and we intend to keep it that way — and this
adds to our security. When terrorists spend their days working to
avoid death or capture, it’s harder for them to plan and execute new
attacks.
We’re also fighting the enemy here at home. We’ve given our
law enforcement and intelligence professionals the tools they need
to stop the terrorists in our midst. We passed the Patriot Act to break
down the wall that prevented law enforcement and intelligence from
————
404

sharing vital information. We created the Terrorist Surveillance
Program to monitor the communications between al Qaeda
commanders abroad and terrorist operatives within our borders. If
al Qaeda is calling somebody in America, we need to know why, in
order to stop attacks.
I want to thank these three Senators for working with us to give
our law enforcement and intelligence officers the tools necessary to
do their jobs. And over the last five years, federal, state, and local
law enforcement have used those tools to break up terrorist cells,
and to prosecute terrorist operatives and supporters in New York,
and Oregon, and Virginia, and Texas, and New Jersey, and Illinois,
Ohio, and other states. By taking the battle to the terrorists and their
supporters on our own soil and across the world, we’ve stopped a
number of al Qaeda plots.
Second, we’re determined to deny weapons of mass
destruction to outlaw regimes and terrorists who would use them
without hesitation. Working with Great Britain and Pakistan
and other nations, the United States shut down the world’s most
dangerous nuclear trading cartel, the AQ Khan network. This
network had supplied Iran and Libya and North Korea with
equipment and know-how that advanced their efforts to obtain
nuclear weapons. And we launched the Proliferation Security
Initiative, a coalition of more than 70 nations that is working
together to stop shipments related to weapons of mass destruction
on land, at sea, and in the air. The greatest threat this world faces
is the danger of extremists and terrorists armed with weapons of
mass destruction — and this is a threat America cannot defeat on
her own. We applaud the determined efforts of many nations around
the world to stop the spread of these dangerous weapons. Together,
we pledge we’ll continue to work together to stop the world’s
most dangerous men from getting their hands on the world’s most
dangerous weapons.
Third, we’re determined to deny terrorists the support of outlaw
regimes. After September the 11th, I laid out a clear doctrine:
America makes no distinction between those who commit acts of
————
405

terror, and those that harbor and support them, because they’re
equally guilty of murder. Thanks to our efforts, there are now
three fewer state sponsors of terror in the world than there were
on September the 11th, 2001. Afghanistan and Iraq have been
transformed from terrorist states into allies in the war on terror.
And the nation of Libya has renounced terrorism, and given up its
weapons of mass destruction programs, and its nuclear materials
and equipment. Over the past five years, we’ve acted to disrupt
the flow of weapons and support from terrorist states to terrorist
networks. And we have made clear that any government that
chooses to be an ally of terror has also chosen to be an enemy of
civilization.
Fourth, we’re determined to deny terrorist networks control
of any nation, or territory within a nation. So, along with our
coalition and the Iraqi government, we’ll stop the terrorists from
taking control of Iraq, and establishing a new safe haven from
which to attack America and the free world. And we’re working
with friends and allies to deny the terrorists the enclaves they seek
to establish in ungoverned areas across the world. By helping
governments reclaim full sovereign control over their territory, we
make ourselves more secure.
Fifth, we’re working to deny terrorists new recruits, by
defeating their hateful ideology and spreading the hope of freedom
— by spreading the hope of freedom across the Middle East. For
decades, American policy sought to achieve peace in the Middle
East by pursuing stability at the expense of liberty. The lack of
freedom in that region helped create conditions where anger and
resentment grew, and radicalism thrived, and terrorists found
willing recruits. And we saw the consequences on September
the 11th, when the terrorists brought death and destruction to our
country. The policy wasn’t working.
The experience of September the 11th made clear, in the long
run, the only way to secure our nation is to change the course of
the Middle East. So America has committed its influence in the
world to advancing freedom and liberty and democracy as the
————
406

great alternatives to repression and radicalism. We’re taking the
side of democratic leaders and moderates and reformers across
the Middle East. We strongly support the voices of tolerance
and moderation in the Muslim world. We’re standing with
Afghanistan’s elected government against al Qaeda and the Taliban
remnants that are trying to restore tyranny in that country. We’re
standing with Lebanon’s young democracy against the foreign
forces that are seeking to undermine the country’s sovereignty and
independence. And we’re standing with the leaders of Iraq’s unity
government as they work to defeat the enemies of freedom, and
chart a more hopeful course for their people. This is why victory is
so important in Iraq. By helping freedom succeed in Iraq, we will
help America, and the Middle East, and the world become more
secure.
During the last five years we’ve learned a lot about this enemy.
We’ve learned that they’re cunning and sophisticated. We’ve
witnessed their ability to change their methods and their tactics
with deadly speed — even as their murderous obsessions remain
unchanging. We’ve seen that it’s the terrorists who have declared
war on Muslims, slaughtering huge numbers of innocent Muslim
men and women around the world.
We know what the terrorists believe, we know what they have
done, and we know what they intend to do. And now the world’s
free nations must summon the will to meet this great challenge.
The road ahead is going to be difficult, and it will require more
sacrifice. Yet we can have confidence in the outcome, because
we’ve seen freedom conquer tyranny and terror before. In the
20th century, free nations confronted and defeated Nazi Germany.
During the Cold War, we confronted Soviet communism, and
today Europe is whole, free and at peace.
And now, freedom is once again contending with the forces of
darkness and tyranny. This time, the battle is unfolding in a new
region — the broader Middle East. This time, we’re not waiting
for our enemies to gather in strength. This time, we’re confronting
them before they gain the capacity to inflict unspeakable damage
————
407

on the world, and we’re confronting their hateful ideology before it
fully takes root.
We see a day when people across the Middle East have
governments that honor their dignity, and unleash their creativity,
and count their votes. We see a day when across this region citizens
are allowed to express themselves freely, women have full rights,
and children are educated and given the tools necessary to succeed
in life. And we see a day when all the nations of the Middle East are
allies in the cause of peace.
We fight for this day, because the security of our own citizens
depends on it. This is the great ideological struggle of the 21st
century — and it is the calling of our generation. All civilized
nations are bound together in this struggle between moderation and
extremism. By coming together, we will roll back this grave threat
to our way of life. We will help the people of the Middle East claim
their freedom, and we will leave a safer and more hopeful world for
our children and grandchildren.
God bless.

Thank you. Thanks for the warm welcome. Welcome to the
White House. Mr. Vice President, Secretary Rice, Attorney General
Gonzales, Ambassador Negroponte, General Hayden, members
of the United States Congress, families who lost loved ones in the
terrorist attacks on our nation, and my fellow citizens: Thanks for
coming.
On the morning of September the 11th, 2001, our nation awoke
to a nightmare attack. Nineteen men, armed with box cutters, took
control of airplanes and turned them into missiles. They used them
to kill nearly 3,000 innocent people. We watched the Twin Towers
collapse before our eyes — and it became instantly clear that we’d
entered a new world, and a dangerous new war.
The attacks of September the 11th horrified our nation.
And amid the grief came new fears and urgent questions: Who
had attacked us? What did they want? And what else were they
planning? Americans saw the destruction the terrorists had caused
in New York, and Washington, and Pennsylvania, and they
wondered if there were other terrorist cells in our midst poised to
strike; they wondered if there was a second wave of attacks still to
come.
With the Twin Towers and the Pentagon still smoldering,
our country on edge, and a stream of intelligence coming in
about potential new attacks, my administration faced immediate
challenges: We had to respond to the attack on our country. We had
to wage an unprecedented war against an enemy unlike any we
had fought before. We had to find the terrorists hiding in America
and across the world, before they were able to strike our country
again. So in the early days and weeks after 9/11, I directed our
————
409

government’s senior national security officials to do everything in
their power, within our laws, to prevent another attack.
Nearly five years have passed since these — those initial days
of shock and sadness — and we are thankful that the terrorists have
not succeeded in launching another attack on our soil. This is not
for the lack of desire or determination on the part of the enemy.
As the recently foiled plot in London shows, the terrorists are
still active, and they’re still trying to strike America, and they’re
still trying to kill our people. One reason the terrorists have not
succeeded is because of the hard work of thousands of dedicated
men and women in our government, who have toiled day and
night, along with our allies, to stop the enemy from carrying out
their plans. And we are grateful for these hardworking citizens of
ours.
Another reason the terrorists have not succeeded is because
our government has changed its policies — and given our military,
intelligence, and law enforcement personnel the tools they need to
fight this enemy and protect our people and preserve our freedoms.
The terrorists who declared war on America represent no
nation, they defend no territory, and they wear no uniform. They
do not mass armies on borders, or flotillas of warships on the high
seas. They operate in the shadows of society; they send small
teams of operatives to infiltrate free nations; they live quietly
among their victims; they conspire in secret, and then they strike
without warning. In this new war, the most important source of
information on where the terrorists are hiding and what they are
planning is the terrorists, themselves. Captured terrorists have
unique knowledge about how terrorist networks operate. They
have knowledge of where their operatives are deployed, and
knowledge about what plots are underway. This intelligence —
this is intelligence that cannot be found any other place. And our
security depends on getting this kind of information. To win the
war on terror, we must be able to detain, question, and, when
appropriate, prosecute terrorists captured here in America, and on
the battlefields around the world.
————
410

After the 9/11 attacks, our coalition launched operations
across the world to remove terrorist safe havens, and capture or
kill terrorist operatives and leaders. Working with our allies, we’ve
captured and detained thousands of terrorists and enemy fighters in
Afghanistan, in Iraq, and other fronts of this war on terror. These
enemy — these are enemy combatants, who were waging war on
our nation. We have a right under the laws of war, and we have an
obligation to the American people, to detain these enemies and stop
them from rejoining the battle.
Most of the enemy combatants we capture are held in
Afghanistan or in Iraq, where they’re questioned by our military
personnel. Many are released after questioning, or turned over
to local authorities — if we determine that they do not pose a
continuing threat and no longer have significant intelligence value.
Others remain in American custody near the battlefield, to ensure
that they don’t return to the fight.
In some cases, we determine that individuals we have captured
pose a significant threat, or may have intelligence that we and our
allies need to have to prevent new attacks. Many are al Qaeda
operatives or Taliban fighters trying to conceal their identities,
and they withhold information that could save American lives. In
these cases, it has been necessary to move these individuals to an
environment where they can be held secretly [sic], questioned by
experts, and — when appropriate — prosecuted for terrorist acts.
Some of these individuals are taken to the United States Naval
Base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. It’s important for Americans
and others across the world to understand the kind of people held
at Guantanamo. These aren’t common criminals, or bystanders
accidentally swept up on the battlefield — we have in place a
rigorous process to ensure those held at Guantanamo Bay belong at
Guantanamo. Those held at Guantanamo include suspected bomb
makers, terrorist trainers, recruiters and facilitators, and potential
suicide bombers. They are in our custody so they cannot murder
our people. One detainee held at Guantanamo told a questioner
questioning him — he said this: “I’ll never forget your face. I will
————
411

kill you, your brothers, your mother, and sisters.”
In addition to the terrorists held at Guantanamo, a small
number of suspected terrorist leaders and operatives captured
during the war have been held and questioned outside the United
States, in a separate program operated by the Central Intelligence
Agency. This group includes individuals believed to be the key
architects of the September the 11th attacks, and attacks on the
USS Cole, an operative involved in the bombings of our embassies
in Kenya and Tanzania, and individuals involved in other attacks
that have taken the lives of innocent civilians across the world.
These are dangerous men with unparalleled knowledge about
terrorist networks and their plans for new attacks. The security of
our nation and the lives of our citizens depend on our ability to
learn what these terrorists know.
Many specifics of this program, including where these
detainees have been held and the details of their confinement,
cannot be divulged. Doing so would provide our enemies with
information they could use to take retribution against our allies
and harm our country. I can say that questioning the detainees in
this program has given us information that has saved innocent
lives by helping us stop new attacks — here in the United States
and across the world. Today, I’m going to share with you some of
the examples provided by our intelligence community of how this
program has saved lives; why it remains vital to the security of the
United States, and our friends and allies; and why it deserves the
support of the United States Congress and the American people.
Within months of September the 11th, 2001, we captured a
man known as Abu Zubaydah. We believe that Zubaydah was a
senior terrorist leader and a trusted associate of Osama bin Laden.
Our intelligence community believes he had run a terrorist camp in
Afghanistan where some of the 9/11 hijackers trained, and that he
helped smuggle al Qaeda leaders out of Afghanistan after coalition
forces arrived to liberate that country. Zubaydah was severely
wounded during the firefight that brought him into custody — and
he survived only because of the medical care arranged by the CIA.
————
412

After he recovered, Zubaydah was defiant and evasive. He
declared his hatred of America. During questioning, he at first
disclosed what he thought was nominal information — and then
stopped all cooperation. Well, in fact, the “nominal” information he
gave us turned out to be quite important. For example, Zubaydah
disclosed Khalid Sheikh Mohammed — or KSM — was the
mastermind behind the 9/11 attacks, and used the alias “Muktar.”
This was a vital piece of the puzzle that helped our intelligence
community pursue KSM. Abu Zubaydah also provided information
that helped stop a terrorist attack being planned for inside the
United States — an attack about which we had no previous
information. Zubaydah told us that al Qaeda operatives were
planning to launch an attack in the U.S., and provided physical
descriptions of the operatives and information on their general
location. Based on the information he provided, the operatives
were detained — one while traveling to the United States.
We knew that Zubaydah had more information that could
save innocent lives, but he stopped talking. As his questioning
proceeded, it became clear that he had received training on how
to resist interrogation. And so the CIA used an alternative set of
procedures. These procedures were designed to be safe, to comply
with our laws, our Constitution, and our treaty obligations. The
Department of Justice reviewed the authorized methods extensively
and determined them to be lawful. I cannot describe the specific
methods used — I think you understand why — if I did, it would
help the terrorists learn how to resist questioning, and to keep
information from us that we need to prevent new attacks on our
country. But I can say the procedures were tough, and they were
safe, and lawful, and necessary.
Zubaydah was questioned using these procedures, and soon
he began to provide information on key al Qaeda operatives,
including information that helped us find and capture more of those
responsible for the attacks on September the 11th. For example,
Zubaydah identified one of KSM’s accomplices in the 9/11
attacks — a terrorist named Ramzi bin al Shibh. The information
————
413

Zubaydah provided helped lead to the capture of bin al Shibh. And
together these two terrorists provided information that helped in
the planning and execution of the operation that captured Khalid
Sheikh Mohammed.
Once in our custody, KSM was questioned by the CIA using
these procedures, and he soon provided information that helped
us stop another planned attack on the United States. During
questioning, KSM told us about another al Qaeda operative he
knew was in CIA custody — a terrorist named Majid Khan. KSM
revealed that Khan had been told to deliver $50,000 to individuals
working for a suspected terrorist leader named Hambali, the leader
of al Qaeda’s Southeast Asian affiliate known as “J-I”. CIA officers
confronted Khan with this information. Khan confirmed that the
money had been delivered to an operative named Zubair, and
provided both a physical description and contact number for this
operative.
Based on that information, Zubair was captured in June of 2003,
and he soon provided information that helped lead to the capture
of Hambali. After Hambali’s arrest, KSM was questioned again.
He identified Hambali’s brother as the leader of a “J-I” cell, and
Hambali’s conduit for communications with al Qaeda. Hambali’s
brother was soon captured in Pakistan, and, in turn, led us to a cell
of 17 Southeast Asian “J-I” operatives. When confronted with the
news that his terror cell had been broken up, Hambali admitted that
the operatives were being groomed at KSM’s request for attacks
inside the United States — probably [sic] using airplanes.
During questioning, KSM also provided many details of other
plots to kill innocent Americans. For example, he described the
design of planned attacks on buildings inside the United States,
and how operatives were directed to carry them out. He told us the
operatives had been instructed to ensure that the explosives went
off at a point that was high enough to prevent the people trapped
above from escaping out the windows.
KSM also provided vital information on al Qaeda’s efforts to
obtain biological weapons. During questioning, KSM admitted
————
414

that he had met three individuals involved in al Qaeda’s efforts to
produce anthrax, a deadly biological agent — and he identified
one of the individuals as a terrorist named Yazid. KSM apparently
believed we already had this information, because Yazid had been
captured and taken into foreign custody before KSM’s arrest. In
fact, we did not know about Yazid’s role in al Qaeda’s anthrax
program. Information from Yazid then helped lead to the capture
of his two principal assistants in the anthrax program. Without
the information provided by KSM and Yazid, we might not have
uncovered this al Qaeda biological weapons program, or stopped
this al Qaeda cell from developing anthrax for attacks against the
United States.
These are some of the plots that have been stopped because
of the information of this vital program. Terrorists held in CIA
custody have also provided information that helped stop a planned
strike on U.S. Marines at Camp Lemonier in Djibouti — they were
going to use an explosive laden water tanker. They helped stop a
planned attack on the U.S. consulate in Karachi using car bombs
and motorcycle bombs, and they helped stop a plot to hijack
passenger planes and fly them into Heathrow or the Canary Wharf
in London.
We’re getting vital information necessary to do our jobs, and
that’s to protect the American people and our allies.
Information from the terrorists in this program has helped us to
identify individuals that al Qaeda deemed suitable for Western
operations, many of whom we had never heard about before. They
include terrorists who were set to case targets inside the United
States, including financial buildings in major cities on the East
Coast. Information from terrorists in CIA custody has played a
role in the capture or questioning of nearly every senior al Qaeda
member or associate detained by the U.S. and its allies since
this program began. By providing everything from initial leads
to photo identifications, to precise locations of where terrorists
were hiding, this program has helped us to take potential mass
murderers off the streets before they were able to kill.
————
415

This program has also played a critical role in helping us
understand the enemy we face in this war. Terrorists in this
program have painted a picture of al Qaeda’s structure and
financing, and communications and logistics. They identified
al Qaeda’s travel routes and safe havens, and explained how al
Qaeda’s senior leadership communicates with its operatives in
places like Iraq. They provided information that allows us — that
has allowed us to make sense of documents and computer records
that we have seized in terrorist raids. They’ve identified voices
in recordings of intercepted calls, and helped us understand the
meaning of potentially critical terrorist communications.
The information we get from these detainees is corroborated
by intelligence, and we’ve received — that we’ve received from
other sources — and together this intelligence has helped us
connect the dots and stop attacks before they occur. Information
from the terrorists questioned in this program helped unravel plots
and terrorist cells in Europe and in other places. It’s helped our
allies protect their people from deadly enemies. This program has
been, and remains, one of the most vital tools in our war against the
terrorists. It is invaluable to America and to our allies. Were it not
for this program, our intelligence community believes that al Qaeda
and its allies would have succeeded in launching another attack
against the American homeland. By giving us information about
terrorist plans we could not get anywhere else, this program has
saved innocent lives.
This program has been subject to multiple legal reviews by the
Department of Justice and CIA lawyers; they’ve determined it
complied with our laws. This program has received strict oversight
by the CIA’s Inspector General. A small number of key leaders
from both political parties on Capitol Hill were briefed about this
program. All those involved in the questioning of the terrorists are
carefully chosen and they’re screened from a pool of experienced
CIA officers. Those selected to conduct the most sensitive
questioning had to complete more than 250 additional hours of
specialized training before they are allowed to have contact with a
————
416

captured terrorist.
I want to be absolutely clear with our people, and the world:
The United States does not torture. It’s against our laws, and
it’s against our values. I have not authorized it — and I will not
authorize it. Last year, my administration worked with Senator
John McCain, and I signed into law the Detainee Treatment Act,
which established the legal standard for treatment of detainees
wherever they are held. I support this act. And as we implement
this law, our government will continue to use every lawful method
to obtain intelligence that can protect innocent people, and stop
another attack like the one we experienced on September the 11th,
2001.
The CIA program has detained only a limited number of
terrorists at any given time — and once we’ve determined that the
terrorists held by the CIA have little or no additional intelligence
value, many of them have been returned to their home countries
for prosecution or detention by their governments. Others have
been accused of terrible crimes against the American people,
and we have a duty to bring those responsible for these crimes to
justice. So we intend to prosecute these men, as appropriate, for
their crimes.
Soon after the war on terror began, I authorized a system
of military commissions to try foreign terrorists accused of war
crimes. Military commissions have been used by Presidents
from George Washington to Franklin Roosevelt to prosecute
war criminals, because the rules for trying enemy combatants
in a time of conflict must be different from those for trying
common criminals or members of our own military. One of the
first suspected terrorists to be put on trial by military commission
was one of Osama bin Laden’s bodyguards — a man named
Hamdan. His lawyers challenged the legality of the military
commission system. It took more than two years for this case to
make its way through the courts. The Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia Circuit upheld the military commissions we
had designed, but this past June, the Supreme Court overturned
————
417

that decision. The Supreme Court determined that military
commissions are an appropriate venue for trying terrorists, but
ruled that military commissions needed to be explicitly authorized
by the United States Congress.
So today, I’m sending Congress legislation to specifically
authorize the creation of military commissions to try terrorists for
war crimes. My administration has been working with members
of both parties in the House and Senate on this legislation. We put
forward a bill that ensures these commissions are established in a
way that protects our national security, and ensures a full and fair
trial for those accused. The procedures in the bill I am sending to
Congress today reflect the reality that we are a nation at war, and
that it’s essential for us to use all reliable evidence to bring these
people to justice.
We’re now approaching the five-year anniversary of the 9/11
attacks — and the families of those murdered that day have waited
patiently for justice. Some of the families are with us today —
they should have to wait no longer. So I’m announcing today that
Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Abu Zubaydah, Ramzi bin al-Shibh,
and 11 other terrorists in CIA custody have been transferred to
the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay. They are
being held in the custody of the Department of Defense. As soon
as Congress acts to authorize the military commissions I have
proposed, the men our intelligence officials believe orchestrated
the deaths of nearly 3,000 Americans on September the 11th,
2001, can face justice.
We’ll also seek to prosecute those believed to be responsible
for the attack on the USS Cole, and an operative believed to be
involved in the bombings of the American embassies in Kenya
and Tanzania. With these prosecutions, we will send a clear
message to those who kill Americans: No longer — how long it
takes, we will find you and we will bring you to justice.
These men will be held in a high-security facility at
Guantanamo. The International Committee of the Red Cross is
being advised of their detention, and will have the opportunity to
————
418

meet with them. Those charged with crimes will be given access
to attorneys who will help them prepare their defense — and they
will be presumed innocent. While at Guantanamo, they will have
access to the same food, clothing, medical care, and opportunities
for worship as other detainees. They will be questioned subject
to the new U.S. Army Field Manual, which the Department of
Defense is issuing today. And they will continue to be treated with
the humanity that they denied others.
As we move forward with the prosecutions, we will continue
to urge nations across the world to take back their nationals
at Guantanamo who will not be prosecuted by our military
commissions. America has no interest in being the world’s jailer.
But one of the reasons we have not been able to close Guantanamo
is that many countries have refused to take back their nationals
held at the facility. Other countries have not provided adequate
assurances that their nationals will not be mistreated — or they will
not return to the battlefield, as more than a dozen people released
from Guantanamo already have. We will continue working to
transfer individuals held at Guantanamo, and ask other countries
to work with us in this process. And we will move toward the day
when we can eventually close the detention facility at Guantanamo
Bay.
I know Americans have heard conflicting information about
Guantanamo. Let me give you some facts. Of the thousands of
terrorists captured across the world, only about 770 have ever been
sent to Guantanamo. Of these, about 315 have been returned to
other countries so far — and about 455 remain in our custody. They
are provided the same quality of medical care as the American
service members who guard them. The International Committee of
the Red Cross has the opportunity to meet privately with all who
are held there. The facility has been visited by government officials
from more than 30 countries, and delegations from international
organizations, as well. After the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe came to visit, one of its delegation members
called Guantanamo “a model prison” where people are treated
————
419

better than in prisons in his own country. Our troops can take great
pride in the work they do at Guantanamo Bay — and so can the
American people.
As we prosecute suspected terrorist leaders and operatives
who have now been transferred to Guantanamo, we’ll continue
searching for those who have stepped forward to take their places.
This nation is going to stay on the offense to protect the American
people. We will continue to bring the world’s most dangerous
terrorists to justice — and we will continue working to collect
the vital intelligence we need to protect our country. The current
transfers mean that there are now no terrorists in the CIA program.
But as more high-ranking terrorists are captured, the need to obtain
intelligence from them will remain critical — and having a CIA
program for questioning terrorists will continue to be crucial to
getting life-saving information.
Some may ask: Why are you acknowledging this program now?
There are two reasons why I’m making these limited disclosures
today. First, we have largely completed our questioning of the
men — and to start the process for bringing them to trial, we must
bring them into the open. Second, the Supreme Court’s recent
decision has impaired our ability to prosecute terrorists through
military commissions, and has put in question the future of the
CIA program. In its ruling on military commissions, the Court
determined that a provision of the Geneva Conventions known as
“Common Article Three” applies to our war with al Qaeda. This
article includes provisions that prohibit “outrages upon personal
dignity” and “humiliating and degrading treatment.” The problem
is that these and other provisions of Common Article Three are
vague and undefined, and each could be interpreted in different
ways by American or foreign judges. And some believe our military
and intelligence personnel involved in capturing and questioning
terrorists could now be at risk of prosecution under the War Crimes
Act — simply for doing their jobs in a thorough and professional
way.
This is unacceptable. Our military and intelligence personnel go
————
420

face to face with the world’s most dangerous men every day. They
have risked their lives to capture some of the most brutal terrorists
on Earth. And they have worked day and night to find out what
the terrorists know so we can stop new attacks. America owes our
brave men and women some things in return. We owe them their
thanks for saving lives and keeping America safe. And we owe
them clear rules, so they can continue to do their jobs and protect
our people.
So today, I’m asking Congress to pass legislation that will
clarify the rules for our personnel fighting the war on terror. First,
I’m asking Congress to list the specific, recognizable offenses that
would be considered crimes under the War Crimes Act — so our
personnel can know clearly what is prohibited in the handling of
terrorist enemies. Second, I’m asking that Congress make explicit
that by following the standards of the Detainee Treatment Act
our personnel are fulfilling America’s obligations under Common
Article Three of the Geneva Conventions. Third, I’m asking that
Congress make it clear that captured terrorists cannot use the
Geneva Conventions as a basis to sue our personnel in courts — in
U.S. courts. The men and women who protect us should not have to
fear lawsuits filed by terrorists because they’re doing their jobs.
The need for this legislation is urgent. We need to ensure that
those questioning terrorists can continue to do everything within
the limits of the law to get information that can save American
lives. My administration will continue to work with the Congress to
get this legislation enacted — but time is of the essence. Congress
is in session just for a few more weeks, and passing this legislation
ought to be the top priority.
As we work with Congress to pass a good bill, we will also
consult with congressional leaders on how to ensure that the CIA
program goes forward in a way that follows the law, that meets the
national security needs of our country, and protects the brave men
and women we ask to obtain information that will save innocent
lives. For the sake of our security, Congress needs to act, and
update our laws to meet the threats of this new era. And I know
————
421

they will.
We’re engaged in a global struggle — and the entire civilized
world has a stake in its outcome. America is a nation of law. And
as I work with Congress to strengthen and clarify our laws here at
home, I will continue to work with members of the international
community who have been our partners in this struggle. I’ve
spoken with leaders of foreign governments, and worked with
them to address their concerns about Guantanamo and our
detention policies. I’ll continue to work with the international
community to construct a common foundation to defend our
nations and protect our freedoms.
Free nations have faced new enemies and adjusted to new
threats before — and we have prevailed. Like the struggles of
the last century, today’s war on terror is, above all, a struggle for
freedom and liberty. The adversaries are different, but the stakes in
this war are the same: We’re fighting for our way of life, and our
ability to live in freedom. We’re fighting for the cause of humanity,
against those who seek to impose the darkness of tyranny and
terror upon the entire world. And we’re fighting for a peaceful
future for our children and our grandchildren.
May God bless you all.

Good evening. Five years ago, this date — September the 11th
— was seared into America’s memory. Nineteen men attacked us
with a barbarity unequaled in our history. They murdered people of
all colors, creeds, and nationalities — and made war upon the entire
free world. Since that day, America and her allies have taken the
offensive in a war unlike any we have fought before. Today, we are
safer, but we are not yet safe. On this solemn night, I’ve asked for
some of your time to discuss the nature of the threat still before us,
what we are doing to protect our nation, and the building of a more
hopeful Middle East that holds the key to peace for America and
the world.
On 9/11, our nation saw the face of evil. Yet on that awful day,
we also witnessed something distinctly American: ordinary citizens
rising to the occasion, and responding with extraordinary acts of
courage. We saw courage in office workers who were trapped on
the high floors of burning skyscrapers — and called home so that
their last words to their families would be of comfort and love. We
saw courage in passengers aboard Flight 93, who recited the 23rd
Psalm — and then charged the cockpit. And we saw courage in the
Pentagon staff who made it out of the flames and smoke — and
ran back in to answer cries for help. On this day, we remember the
innocent who lost their lives — and we pay tribute to those who
gave their lives so that others might live.
For many of our citizens, the wounds of that morning are still
fresh. I’ve met firefighters and police officers who choke up at
the memory of fallen comrades. I’ve stood with families gathered
on a grassy field in Pennsylvania, who take bittersweet pride in
loved ones who refused to be victims — and gave America our
————
423

first victory in the war on terror. I’ve sat beside young mothers
with children who are now five years old — and still long for
the daddies who will never cradle them in their arms. Out of this
suffering, we resolve to honor every man and woman lost. And we
seek their lasting memorial in a safer and more hopeful world.
Since the horror of 9/11, we’ve learned a great deal about
the enemy. We have learned that they are evil and kill without
mercy — but not without purpose. We have learned that they form
a global network of extremists who are driven by a perverted
vision of Islam — a totalitarian ideology that hates freedom,
rejects tolerance, and despises all dissent. And we have learned
that their goal is to build a radical Islamic empire where women
are prisoners in their homes, men are beaten for missing prayer
meetings, and terrorists have a safe haven to plan and launch
attacks on America and other civilized nations. The war against
this enemy is more than a military conflict. It is the decisive
ideological struggle of the 21st century, and the calling of our
generation.
Our nation is being tested in a way that we have not been
since the start of the Cold War. We saw what a handful of our
enemies can do with box-cutters and plane tickets. We hear their
threats to launch even more terrible attacks on our people. And we
know that if they were able to get their hands on weapons of mass
destruction, they would use them against us. We face an enemy
determined to bring death and suffering into our homes. America
did not ask for this war, and every American wishes it were over.
So do I. But the war is not over — and it will not be over until
either we or the extremists emerge victorious. If we do not defeat
these enemies now, we will leave our children to face a Middle
East overrun by terrorist states and radical dictators armed with
nuclear weapons. We are in a war that will set the course for this
new century — and determine the destiny of millions across the
world.
For America, 9/11 was more than a tragedy — it changed the
way we look at the world. On September the 11th, we resolved
————
424

that we would go on the offense against our enemies, and we
would not distinguish between the terrorists and those who harbor
or support them. So we helped drive the Taliban from power in
Afghanistan. We put al Qaeda on the run, and killed or captured
most of those who planned the 9/11 attacks, including the man
believed to be the mastermind, Khalid Sheik Mohammed. He and
other suspected terrorists have been questioned by the Central
Intelligence Agency, and they provided valuable information that
has helped stop attacks in America and across the world. Now these
men have been transferred to Guantanamo Bay, so they can be held
to account for their actions. Osama bin Laden and other terrorists
are still in hiding. Our message to them is clear: No matter how
long it takes, America will find you, and we will bring you to
justice.
On September the 11th, we learned that America must confront
threats before they reach our shores, whether those threats come
from terrorist networks or terrorist states. I’m often asked why
we’re in Iraq when Saddam Hussein was not responsible for the
9/11 attacks. The answer is that the regime of Saddam Hussein was
a clear threat. My administration, the Congress, and the United
Nations saw the threat — and after 9/11, Saddam’s regime posed
a risk that the world could not afford to take. The world is safer
because Saddam Hussein is no longer in power. And now the
challenge is to help the Iraqi people build a democracy that fulfills
the dreams of the nearly 12 million Iraqis who came out to vote in
free elections last December.
Al Qaeda and other extremists from across the world have
come to Iraq to stop the rise of a free society in the heart of the
Middle East. They have joined the remnants of Saddam’s regime
and other armed groups to foment sectarian violence and drive us
out. Our enemies in Iraq are tough and they are committed — but
so are Iraqi and coalition forces. We’re adapting to stay ahead of
the enemy, and we are carrying out a clear plan to ensure that a
democratic Iraq succeeds.
We’re training Iraqi troops so they can defend their nation.
————
425

We’re helping Iraq’s unity government grow in strength and serve
its people. We will not leave until this work is done. Whatever
mistakes have been made in Iraq, the worst mistake would be to
think that if we pulled out, the terrorists would leave us alone. They
will not leave us alone. They will follow us. The safety of America
depends on the outcome of the battle in the streets of Baghdad.
Osama bin Laden calls this fight “the Third World War” — and
he says that victory for the terrorists in Iraq will mean America’s
“defeat and disgrace forever.” If we yield Iraq to men like bin
Laden, our enemies will be emboldened; they will gain a new
safe haven; they will use Iraq’s resources to fuel their extremist
movement. We will not allow this to happen. America will stay in
the fight. Iraq will be a free nation, and a strong ally in the war on
terror.
We can be confident that our coalition will succeed because the
Iraqi people have been steadfast in the face of unspeakable violence.
And we can be confident in victory because of the skill and resolve
of America’s Armed Forces. Every one of our troops is a volunteer,
and since the attacks of September the 11th, more than 1.6 million
Americans have stepped forward to put on our nation’s uniform.
In Iraq, Afghanistan, and other fronts in the war on terror, the men
and women of our military are making great sacrifices to keep us
safe. Some have suffered terrible injuries — and nearly 3,000 have
given their lives. America cherishes their memory. We pray for their
families. And we will never back down from the work they have
begun.
We also honor those who toil day and night to keep our
homeland safe, and we are giving them the tools they need to
protect our people. We’ve created the Department of Homeland
Security. We have torn down the wall that kept law enforcement
and intelligence from sharing information. We’ve tightened
security at our airports and seaports and borders, and we’ve created
new programs to monitor enemy bank records and phone calls.
Thanks to the hard work of our law enforcement and intelligence
professionals, we have broken up terrorist cells in our midst and
————
426

saved American lives.
Five years after 9/11, our enemies have not succeeded in
launching another attack on our soil, but they’ve not been idle.
Al Qaeda and those inspired by its hateful ideology have carried
out terrorist attacks in more than two dozen nations. And just last
month, they were foiled in a plot to blow up passenger planes
headed for the United States. They remain determined to attack
America and kill our citizens — and we are determined to stop
them. We’ll continue to give the men and women who protect us
every resource and legal authority they need to do their jobs.
In the first days after the 9/11 attacks I promised to use every
element of national power to fight the terrorists, wherever we find
them. One of the strongest weapons in our arsenal is the power
of freedom. The terrorists fear freedom as much as they do our
firepower. They are thrown into panic at the sight of an old man
pulling the election lever, girls enrolling in schools, or families
worshiping God in their own traditions. They know that given a
choice, people will choose freedom over their extremist ideology.
So their answer is to deny people this choice by raging against the
forces of freedom and moderation. This struggle has been called a
clash of civilizations. In truth, it is a struggle for civilization. We
are fighting to maintain the way of life enjoyed by free nations.
And we’re fighting for the possibility that good and decent people
across the Middle East can raise up societies based on freedom and
tolerance and personal dignity.
We are now in the early hours of this struggle between tyranny
and freedom. Amid the violence, some question whether the people
of the Middle East want their freedom, and whether the forces
of moderation can prevail. For 60 years, these doubts guided
our policies in the Middle East. And then, on a bright September
morning, it became clear that the calm we saw in the Middle East
was only a mirage. Years of pursuing stability to promote peace
had left us with neither. So we changed our policies, and committed
America’s influence in the world to advancing freedom and
democracy as the great alternatives to repression and radicalism.
————
427

With our help, the people of the Middle East are now stepping
forward to claim their freedom. From Kabul to Baghdad to Beirut,
there are brave men and women risking their lives each day for
the same freedoms that we enjoy. And they have one question for
us: Do we have the confidence to do in the Middle East what our
fathers and grandfathers accomplished in Europe and Asia? By
standing with democratic leaders and reformers, by giving voice to
the hopes of decent men and women, we’re offering a path away
from radicalism. And we are enlisting the most powerful force for
peace and moderation in the Middle East: the desire of millions to
be free.
Across the broader Middle East, the extremists are fighting to
prevent such a future. Yet America has confronted evil before, and
we have defeated it — sometimes at the cost of thousands of good
men in a single battle. When Franklin Roosevelt vowed to defeat
two enemies across two oceans, he could not have foreseen D-Day
and Iwo Jima — but he would not have been surprised at the
outcome. When Harry Truman promised American support for free
peoples resisting Soviet aggression, he could not have foreseen the
rise of the Berlin Wall — but he would not have been surprised
to see it brought down. Throughout our history, America has seen
liberty challenged, and every time, we have seen liberty triumph
with sacrifice and determination.
At the start of this young century, America looks to the day
when the people of the Middle East leave the desert of despotism
for the fertile gardens of liberty, and resume their rightful place in a
world of peace and prosperity. We look to the day when the nations
of that region recognize their greatest resource is not the oil in the
ground, but the talent and creativity of their people. We look to the
day when moms and dads throughout the Middle East see a future
of hope and opportunity for their children. And when that good
day comes, the clouds of war will part, the appeal of radicalism
will decline, and we will leave our children with a better and safer
world.
On this solemn anniversary, we rededicate ourselves to this
————
428

cause. Our nation has endured trials, and we face a difficult road
ahead. Winning this war will require the determined efforts of a
unified country, and we must put aside our differences and work
together to meet the test that history has given us. We will defeat
our enemies. We will protect our people. And we will lead the 21st
century into a shining age of human liberty.
Earlier this year, I traveled to the United States Military
Academy. I was there to deliver the commencement address to the
first class to arrive at West Point after the attacks of September
the 11th. That day I met a proud mom named RoseEllen Dowdell.
She was there to watch her son, Patrick, accept his commission in
the finest Army the world has ever known. A few weeks earlier,
RoseEllen had watched her other son, James, graduate from the
Fire Academy in New York City. On both these days, her thoughts
turned to someone who was not there to share the moment: her
husband, Kevin Dowdell. Kevin was one of the 343 firefighters
who rushed to the burning towers of the World Trade Center on
September the 11th — and never came home. His sons lost their
father that day, but not the passion for service he instilled in them.
Here is what RoseEllen says about her boys: “As a mother, I cross
my fingers and pray all the time for their safety — but as worried
as I am, I’m also proud, and I know their dad would be, too.”
Our nation is blessed to have young Americans like these —
and we will need them. Dangerous enemies have declared their
intention to destroy our way of life. They’re not the first to try, and
their fate will be the same as those who tried before. Nine-Eleven
showed us why. The attacks were meant to bring us to our knees,
and they did, but not in the way the terrorists intended. Americans
united in prayer, came to the aid of neighbors in need, and resolved
that our enemies would not have the last word. The spirit of our
people is the source of America’s strength. And we go forward
with trust in that spirit, confidence in our purpose, and faith in a
loving God who made us to be free.
Thank you, and may God bless you.

Mr. Secretary General, Madam President, distinguished
delegates, and ladies and gentlemen: I want to thank you for the
privilege of speaking to this General Assembly.
Last week, America and the world marked the fifth anniversary
of the attacks that filled another September morning with death
and suffering. On that terrible day, extremists killed nearly
3,000 innocent people, including citizens of dozens of nations
represented right here in this chamber. Since then, the enemies of
humanity have continued their campaign of murder. Al Qaeda and
those inspired by its extremist ideology have attacked more than
two dozen nations. And recently a different group of extremists
deliberately provoked a terrible conflict in Lebanon. At the start
of the 21st century, it is clear that the world is engaged in a great
ideological struggle, between extremists who use terror as a
weapon to create fear, and moderate people who work for peace.
Five years ago, I stood at this podium and called on the
community of nations to defend civilization and build a more
hopeful future. This is still the great challenge of our time; it is the
calling of our generation. This morning, I want to speak about the
more hopeful world that is within our reach, a world beyond terror,
where ordinary men and women are free to determine their own
destiny, where the voices of moderation are empowered, and where
the extremists are marginalized by the peaceful majority. This
world can be ours if we seek it and if we work together.
The principles of this world beyond terror can be found in the
very first sentence of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
This document declares that the “equal and inalienable rights of
all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom and
————
431

justice and peace in the world.” One of the authors of this document
was a Lebanese diplomat named Charles Malik, who would go on
to become President of this Assembly. Mr. Malik insisted that these
principles apply equally to all people, of all regions, of all religions,
including the men and women of the Arab world that was his home.
In the nearly six decades since that document was approved,
we have seen the forces of freedom and moderation transform
entire continents. Sixty years after a terrible war, Europe is now
whole, free, and at peace — and Asia has seen freedom progress
and hundreds of millions of people lifted out of desperate poverty.
The words of the Universal Declaration are as true today as they
were when they were written. As liberty flourishes, nations grow in
tolerance and hope and peace. And we’re seeing that bright future
begin to take root in the broader Middle East.
Some of the changes in the Middle East have been dramatic,
and we see the results in this chamber. Five years ago, Afghanistan
was ruled by the brutal Taliban regime, and its seat in this body was
contested. Now this seat is held by the freely elected government
of Afghanistan, which is represented today by President Karzai.
Five years ago, Iraq’s seat in this body was held by a dictator who
killed his citizens, invaded his neighbors, and showed his contempt
for the world by defying more than a dozen U.N. Security Council
resolutions. Now Iraq’s seat is held by a democratic government
that embodies the aspirations of the Iraq people, who’s represented
today by President Talabani. With these changes, more than 50
million people have been given a voice in this chamber for the first
time in decades.
Some of the changes in the Middle East are happening
gradually, but they are real. Algeria has held its first competitive
presidential election, and the military remained neutral. The
United Arab Emirates recently announced that half of the seats in
its Federal National Council will be chosen by elections. Kuwait
held elections in which women were allowed to vote and run for
office for the first time. Citizens have voted in municipal elections
in Saudi Arabia, in parliamentary elections in Jordan and Bahrain,
————
432

and in multiparty presidential elections in Yemen and Egypt. These
are important steps, and the governments should continue to move
forward with other reforms that show they trust their people. Every
nation that travels the road to freedom moves at a different pace,
and the democracies they build will reflect their own culture and
traditions. But the destination is the same: A free society where
people live at peace with each other and at peace with the world.
Some have argued that the democratic changes we’re seeing in
the Middle East are destabilizing the region. This argument rests on
a false assumption, that the Middle East was stable to begin with.
The reality is that the stability we thought we saw in the Middle
East was a mirage. For decades, millions of men and women in the
region have been trapped in oppression and hopelessness. And these
conditions left a generation disillusioned, and made this region a
breeding ground for extremism.
Imagine what it’s like to be a young person living in a country
that is not moving toward reform. You’re 21 years old, and while
your peers in other parts of the world are casting their ballots
for the first time, you are powerless to change the course of your
government. While your peers in other parts of the world have
received educations that prepare them for the opportunities of a
global economy, you have been fed propaganda and conspiracy
theories that blame others for your country’s shortcomings. And
everywhere you turn, you hear extremists who tell you that you can
escape your misery and regain your dignity through violence and
terror and martyrdom. For many across the broader Middle East,
this is the dismal choice presented every day.
Every civilized nation, including those in the Muslim world,
must support those in the region who are offering a more hopeful
alternative. We know that when people have a voice in their future,
they are less likely to blow themselves up in suicide attacks. We
know that when leaders are accountable to their people, they are
more likely to seek national greatness in the achievements of their
citizens, rather than in terror and conquest. So we must stand with
democratic leaders and moderate reformers across the broader
————
433

Middle East. We must give them voice to the hopes of decent men
and women who want for their children the same things we want
for ours. We must seek stability through a free and just Middle
East where the extremists are marginalized by millions of citizens
in control of their own destinies.
Today, I’d like to speak directly to the people across the
broader Middle East: My country desires peace. Extremists in your
midst spread propaganda claiming that the West is engaged in a
war against Islam. This propaganda is false, and its purpose is to
confuse you and justify acts of terror. We respect Islam, but we
will protect our people from those who pervert Islam to sow death
and destruction. Our goal is to help you build a more tolerant and
hopeful society that honors people of all faiths and promote the
peace.
To the people of Iraq: Nearly 12 million of you braved the
car bombers and assassins last December to vote in free elections.
The world saw you hold up purple ink-stained fingers, and your
courage filled us with admiration. You’ve stood firm in the face of
horrendous acts of terror and sectarian violence — and we will not
abandon you in your struggle to build a free nation. America and
our coalition partners will continue to stand with the democratic
government you elected. We will continue to help you secure the
international assistance and investment you need to create jobs
and opportunity, working with the United Nations and through
the International Compact with Iraq endorsed here in New York
yesterday. We will continue to train those of you who stepped
forward to fight the enemies of freedom. We will not yield the
future of your country to terrorists and extremists. In return, your
leaders must rise to the challenges your country is facing, and
make difficult choices to bring security and prosperity. Working
together, we will help your democracy succeed, so it can become a
beacon of hope for millions in the Muslim world.
To the people of Afghanistan: Together, we overthrew the
Taliban regime that brought misery into your lives and harbored
terrorists who brought death to the citizens of many nations. Since
————
434

then, we have watched you choose your leaders in free elections
and build a democratic government. You can be proud of these
achievements. We respect your courage, and your determination
to live in peace and freedom. We will continue to stand with you
to defend your democratic gains. Today forces from more than 40
countries, including members of the NATO Alliance, are bravely
serving side-by-side with you against the extremists who want to
bring down the free government you’ve established. We’ll help
you defeat these enemies and build a free Afghanistan that will
never again oppress you, or be a safe haven for terrorists.
To the people of Lebanon: Last year, you inspired the world
when you came out into the streets to demand your independence
from Syrian dominance. You drove Syrian forces from your
country and you reestablished democracy. Since then, you
have been tested by the fighting that began with Hezbollah’s
unprovoked attacks on Israel. Many of you have seen your homes
and communities caught in crossfire. We see your suffering, and
the world is helping you to rebuild your country, and helping
you deal with the armed extremists who are undermining your
democracy by acting as a state within a state. The United Nations
has passed a good resolution that has authorized an international
force, led by France and Italy, to help you restore Lebanese
sovereignty over Lebanese soil. For many years, Lebanon was a
model of democracy and pluralism and openness in the region —
and it will be again.
To the people of Iran: The United States respects you; we
respect your country. We admire your rich history, your vibrant
culture, and your many contributions to civilization. You deserve
an opportunity to determine your own future, an economy that
rewards your intelligence and your talents, and a society that
allows you to fulfill your tremendous potential. The greatest
obstacle to this future is that your rulers have chosen to deny you
liberty and to use your nation’s resources to fund terrorism, and
fuel extremism, and pursue nuclear weapons. The United Nations
has passed a clear resolution requiring that the regime in Tehran
————
435

meet its international obligations. Iran must abandon its nuclear
weapons ambitions. Despite what the regime tells you, we have
no objection to Iran’s pursuit of a truly peaceful nuclear power
program. We’re working toward a diplomatic solution to this crisis.
And as we do, we look to the day when you can live in freedom —
and America and Iran can be good friends and close partners in the
cause of peace.
To the people of Syria: Your land is home to a great people
with a proud tradition of learning and commerce. Today your rulers
have allowed your country to become a crossroad for terrorism. In
your midst, Hamas and Hezbollah are working to destabilize the
region, and your government is turning your country into a tool of
Iran. This is increasing your country’s isolation from the world.
Your government must choose a better way forward by ending its
support for terror, and living in peace with your neighbors, and
opening the way to a better life for you and your families.
To the people of Darfur: You have suffered unspeakable
violence, and my nation has called these atrocities what they
are — genocide. For the last two years, America joined with
the international community to provide emergency food aid
and support for an African Union peacekeeping force. Yet your
suffering continues. The world must step forward to provide
additional humanitarian aid — and we must strengthen the African
Union force that has done good work, but is not strong enough to
protect you. The Security Council has approved a resolution that
would transform the African Union force into a blue-helmeted
force that is larger and more robust. To increase its strength and
effectiveness, NATO nations should provide logistics and other
support. The regime in Khartoum is stopping the deployment
of this force. If the Sudanese government does not approve this
peacekeeping force quickly, the United Nations must act. Your
lives and the credibility of the United Nations is at stake. So
today I’m announcing that I’m naming a Presidential Special
Envoy — former USAID Administrator Andrew Natsios — to
lead America’s efforts to resolve the outstanding disputes and help
————
436

bring peace to your land.
The world must also stand up for peace in the Holy Land. I’m
committed to two democratic states — Israel and Palestine
— living side-by-side in peace and security. I’m committed
to a Palestinian state that has territorial integrity and will live
peacefully with the Jewish state of Israel. This is the vision set
forth in the road map — and helping the parties reach this goal
is one of the great objectives of my presidency. The Palestinian
people have suffered from decades of corruption and violence
and the daily humiliation of occupation. Israeli citizens have
endured brutal acts of terrorism and constant fear of attack since
the birth of their nation. Many brave men and women have made
the commitment to peace. Yet extremists in the region are stirring
up hatred and trying to prevent these moderate voices from
prevailing.
This struggle is unfolding in the Palestinian territories.
Earlier this year, the Palestinian people voted in a free election.
The leaders of Hamas campaigned on a platform of ending
corruption and improving the lives of the Palestinian people, and
they prevailed. The world is waiting to see whether the Hamas
government will follow through on its promises, or pursue an
extremist agenda. And the world has sent a clear message to the
leaders of Hamas: Serve the interests of the Palestinian people.
Abandon terror, recognize Israel’s right to exist, honor agreements,
and work for peace.
President Abbas is committed to peace, and to his people’s
aspirations for a state of their own. Prime Minister Olmert is
committed to peace, and has said he intends to meet with President
Abbas to make real progress on the outstanding issues between
them. I believe peace can be achieved, and that a democratic
Palestinian state is possible. I hear from leaders in the region
who want to help. I’ve directed Secretary of State Rice to lead a
diplomatic effort to engage moderate leaders across the region, to
help the Palestinians reform their security services, and support
Israeli and Palestinian leaders in their efforts to come together to
————
437

resolve their differences. Prime Minister Blair has indicated that
his country will work with partners in Europe to help strengthen
the governing institutions of the Palestinian administration. We
welcome his initiative. Countries like Saudi Arabia and Jordan and
Egypt have made clear they’re willing to contribute the diplomatic
and financial assistance necessary to help these efforts succeed.
I’m optimistic that by supporting the forces of democracy and
moderation, we can help Israelis and Palestinians build a more
hopeful future and achieve the peace in a Holy Land we all want.
Freedom, by its nature, cannot be imposed — it must be
chosen. From Beirut to Baghdad, people are making the choice for
freedom. And the nations gathered in this chamber must make a
choice, as well: Will we support the moderates and reformers who
are working for change across the Middle East — or will we yield
the future to the terrorists and extremists? America has made its
choice: We will stand with the moderates and reformers.
Recently a courageous group of Arab and Muslim intellectuals
wrote me a letter. In it, they said this: “The shore of reform is the
only one on which any lights appear, even though the journey
demands courage and patience and perseverance.” The United
Nations was created to make that journey possible. Together
we must support the dreams of good and decent people who are
working to transform a troubled region — and by doing so, we will
advance the high ideals on which this institution was founded.
Thank you for your time. God bless.



Mr. Secretary, thank you very much. Laura and I are honored
to be here to honor our dad. We appreciate you coming. Mother,
it’s good to see you. Members of the Bush family, all of you,
distinguished members of Congress, Governor, ex-governors, the
men and women of the United States Navy, military veterans, the
workers who helped build this great ship: I join you — I know you
join me in saying to our father: President Bush, your ship has come
in. In a few minutes, my sister Dorothy will christen the newest
and most advanced aircraft carrier in the Navy — the George H. W.
Bush. For the pilots of the World War II generation who are with
us today, this carrier may seem a little more inviting than the ones
you landed on. As you can see, our Navy has made a few upgrades.
The George H. W. Bush is the latest in the Nimitz line of aircraft
carriers. She is unrelenting, she is unshakable, she is unyielding,
she is unstoppable. As a matter of fact, probably should have been
named the Barbara Bush.
In accord with a long and honored tradition, we gather to
christen this fine ship. We recall the service and sacrifice of earlier
generations. And we pay tribute to a new generation of sailors and
Marines who have stepped forward to serve in freedom’s cause.
The George H. W. Bush is named for a man who exemplifies
the great character of our country. On the day Pearl Harbor was
attacked, George H. W. Bush was a teenager, he was a high school
senior. Six months later, he was sworn into the Navy. A year later,
he received his wings at a ceremony in Corpus Christi, Texas. Here
is what he said. He said, “I had an ensign’s stripe and an admiral’s
confidence.” “I was a Navy pilot.”
Our dad would become known as one of the Navy’s youngest
pilots. But that wasn’t his only distinction. While training along the
————
439

Chesapeake Bay, the pilots in our dad’s flight class learned about
a beach across the way where young ladies liked to sunbathe. It
became popular for the pilots to fly low over the beach. So one day
he came in low to take a look. It just so happened to be the same
day that a traveling circus had set up its tents. Dad’s flyover upset
an elephant, causing him to break lose and make a run throughout
the town. He was called in for a reprimand from his commander.
He puts it this way, “I was grounded for causing an elephant
stampede” — probably the only Navy pilot in American history
who can make that claim.
After training, he was assigned to a light carrier. He took part
in the Great Turkey Shoot of the Marianas. He knew the horror of
kamikaze attacks. He would complete 58 combat missions. These
were tough days, but he had something that kept him going. And
if you look closely at the photographs of the planes he flew, you
will find what kept him going in the name he had painted under his
cockpit: Barbara.
One of Dad’s most important missions was a strike on a radio
tower on an island called Chichi Jima. The Japanese were using
that tower to intercept U.S. military radio transmissions and alert
the enemy about impending American air strikes. On September
2, 1944, his squadron was given a simple assignment: to take it
out. The pilots knew they would face heavy enemy fire, because
the Japanese had fortified the island. But Dad and his fellow pilots
did their duty without complaint or hesitation. During that raid, his
plane was hit by anti-aircraft artillery and it caught on fire. Yet he
kept his plane on course, he released his four bombs, and scored
four direct hits on that tower. He headed out to sea, he ejected.
Japanese boats were sent out to capture him. And after more
than two harrowing hours at sea alone in a rubber life raft, he was
rescued by the crew of the USS Finback. For his action, he earned
the Distinguished Flying Cross. Yet it is characteristic that from
those moments aboard his life raft to this ceremony today, Dad’s
thoughts have always been of the two fine members of his crew
who did not make it home: Radioman Second Class John Delaney
————
440

and Lieutenant JG Ted White. On that day over Chichi Jima, a
young American became a war hero and learned an old lesson:
With the defense of freedom comes loss and sacrifice.
The George H. W. Bush honors a generation that valued
service above self. Like so many who served in World War II,
duty came naturally to our father. In the four years of that war, 16
million Americans would put on the uniform. And the human costs
were appalling: from the beaches of Normandy to the jungles of
Southeast Asia, more than 400,000 Americans would give their
lives.
From the beginning of that war, there were those who argued
that freedom had seen its day, and that the future belonged to the
hard men in Tokyo and Berlin. Yet the war machines of Imperial
Japan and Nazi Germany would be brought down by American
GIs who only months before had been students, and farmers, and
bank clerks, and factory hands. The generation of World War II
taught the world’s tyrants a telling lesson: There is no power like
the power of freedom — and no soldier as strong as a soldier who
fights for a free future for his children.
The George H. W. Bush will serve as a new generation of
Americans every bit as brave and selfless as those who have come
before them. The 21st century — in the 21st century, freedom
is again under attack, and young Americans are volunteering to
answer the call. In the years since September the 11th, 2001, more
than 1.6 million Americans have volunteered to wear the uniform
of the United States. Today they serve in distant lands and on far
seas — from the islands of Southeast Asia, to the Horn of Africa,
to the mountains of Afghanistan and in Iraq. And once again,
with perseverance, and courage, and confidence in the power of
freedom, a new generation of Americans will leave a more hopeful
and peaceful world for generations to come.
The men and women of the United States military represent the
best of America. And they deserve the best America can give them.
And the George H. W. Bush is the best America can give them.
During his time in the South Pacific, Ensign Bush served on a
————
441

light carrier called the USS San Jacinto. That ship was named for
the 1836 battle of San Jacinto. And in that battle, the free Texas
forces led by Sam Houston defeated a Mexican army that was
much larger in size — and Sam Houston succeeded in capturing
the Mexican general responsible for the slaughter of the Alamo just
a few weeks before. Yet on the eve of the battle, the outcome was
far from certain, and the Mexicans seemed to hold the advantage.
So Sam Houston called his Texans together, and he reminded them
what they were fighting for. He told them, “Be men, be free men,
that your children may bless their father’s name.”
On this proud day, the children of George H. W. Bush bless
their father’s name, the United States Navy honors his name, and
the ship that bears his name sails into this young century as a
symbol of American strength and freedom. May God watch over
all those who sail this ship, all those who fly from her deck, and all
those at home who pray for their safe return.
It is my honor to bring to you the 41st President, a great dad,
George H. W. Bush.


Mrs. Ford, the Ford family; distinguished guests, including our
Presidents and First Ladies; and our fellow citizens:
We are here today to say goodbye to a great man. Gerald Ford
was born and reared in the American heartland. He belonged to a
generation that measured men by their honesty and their courage.
He grew to manhood under the roof of a loving mother and father
— and when times were tough, he took part-time jobs to help them
out. In President Ford, the world saw the best of America — and
America found a man whose character and leadership would bring
calm and healing to one of the most divisive moments in our
nation’s history.
Long before he was known in Washington, Gerald Ford
showed his character and his leadership. As a star football player
for the University of Michigan, he came face to face with racial
prejudice when Georgia Tech came to Ann Arbor for a football
game. One of Michigan’s best players was an African American
student named Willis Ward. Georgia Tech said they would not
take the field if a black man were allowed to play. Gerald Ford
was furious at Georgia Tech for making the demand, and for the
University of Michigan for caving in. He agreed to play only
after Willis Ward personally asked him to. The stand Gerald Ford
took that day was never forgotten by his friend. And Gerald Ford
never forgot that day either — and three decades later, he proudly
supported the Civil Rights Act and the Voting Rights Act in the
United States Congress.
Gerald Ford showed his character in the devotion to his family.
On the day he became President, he told the nation, “I am indebted
to no man, and only to one woman — to my dear wife.” By then
————
443

Betty Ford had a pretty good idea of what marriage to Gerald Ford
involved. After all, their wedding had taken place less than three
weeks before his first election to the United States Congress, and
his idea of a “honeymoon” was driving to Ann Arbor with his bride
so they could attend a brunch before the Michigan-Northwestern
game the next day. And that was the beginning of a great marriage.
The Fords would have four fine children. And Steve, Jack, Mike,
and Susan know that, as proud as their Dad was of being President,
Gerald Ford was even prouder of the other titles he held: father, and
grandfather, and great-grandfather.
Gerald Ford showed his character in the uniform of our country.
When Pearl Harbor was attacked in December 1941, Gerald Ford
was an attorney fresh out of Yale Law School, but when his nation
called he did not hesitate. In early 1942 he volunteered for the Navy
and, after receiving his commission, worked hard to get assigned
to a ship headed into combat. Eventually his wish was granted, and
Lieutenant Ford was assigned to the aircraft carrier, USS Monterey,
which saw action in some of the biggest battles of the Pacific.
Gerald Ford showed his character in public office. As a young
congressman, he earned a reputation for an ability to get along with
others without compromising his principles. He was greatly admired
by his colleagues and they trusted him a lot. And so when President
Nixon needed to replace a vice president who had resigned in
scandal, he naturally turned to a man whose name was a synonym
for integrity: Gerald R. Ford. And eight months later, when he was
elevated to the presidency, it was because America needed him, not
because he needed the office.
President Ford assumed office at a terrible time in our nation’s
history. At home, America was divided by political turmoil and
wracked by inflation. In Southeast Asia, Saigon fell just nine
months into his presidency. Amid all the turmoil, Gerald Ford was
a rock of stability. And when he put his hand on his family Bible to
take the presidential oath of office, he brought grace to a moment of
great doubt.
In a short time, the gentleman from Grand Rapids proved that
————
444

behind the affability was firm resolve. When a U.S. ship called
the Mayaguez was seized by Cambodia, President Ford made the
tough decision to send in the Marines — and all the crew members
were rescued. He was criticized for signing the Helsinki Accords,
yet history has shown that document helped bring down the Soviet
Union, as courageous men and women behind the Iron Curtain used
it to demand their God-given liberties. Twice assassins attempted to
take the life of this good and decent man, yet he refused to curtail
his public appearances. And when he thought that the nation needed
to put Watergate behind us, he made the tough and decent decision
to pardon President Nixon, even though that decision probably cost
him the presidential election.
Gerald Ford assumed the presidency when the nation needed a
leader of character and humility — and we found it in the man from
Grand Rapids. President Ford’s time in office was brief, but history
will long remember the courage and common sense that helped
restore trust in the workings of our democracy.
Laura and I had the honor of hosting the Ford family for Gerald
Ford’s 90th birthday. It’s one of the highlights of our time in the
White House. I will always cherish the memory of the last time
I saw him, this past year in California. He was still smiling, still
counting himself lucky to have Betty at his side, and still displaying
the optimism and generosity that made him one of America’s most
beloved leaders.
And so, on behalf of a grateful nation, we bid farewell to our
38th President. We thank the Almighty for Gerald Ford’s life, and
we ask for God’s blessings on Gerald Ford and his family.

Good evening. Tonight in Iraq, the Armed Forces of the United
States are engaged in a struggle that will determine the direction of
the global war on terror — and our safety here at home. The new
strategy I outline tonight will change America’s course in Iraq, and
help us succeed in the fight against terror.
When I addressed you just over a year ago, nearly 12 million
Iraqis had cast their ballots for a unified and democratic nation.
The elections of 2005 were a stunning achievement. We thought
that these elections would bring the Iraqis together, and that as we
trained Iraqi security forces we could accomplish our mission with
fewer American troops.
But in 2006, the opposite happened. The violence in Iraq
— particularly in Baghdad — overwhelmed the political gains
the Iraqis had made. Al Qaeda terrorists and Sunni insurgents
recognized the mortal danger that Iraq’s elections posed for their
cause, and they responded with outrageous acts of murder aimed
at innocent Iraqis. They blew up one of the holiest shrines in Shia
Islam — the Golden Mosque of Samarra — in a calculated effort to
provoke Iraq’s Shia population to retaliate. Their strategy worked.
Radical Shia elements, some supported by Iran, formed death
squads. And the result was a vicious cycle of sectarian violence
that continues today.
The situation in Iraq is unacceptable to the American people
— and it is unacceptable to me. Our troops in Iraq have fought
bravely. They have done everything we have asked them to do.
Where mistakes have been made, the responsibility rests with me.
It is clear that we need to change our strategy in Iraq.
So my national security team, military commanders, and
diplomats conducted a comprehensive review. We consulted
————
447

members of Congress from both parties, our allies abroad, and
distinguished outside experts. We benefitted from the thoughtful
recommendations of the Iraq Study Group, a bipartisan panel led
by former Secretary of State James Baker and former Congressman
Lee Hamilton. In our discussions, we all agreed that there is no
magic formula for success in Iraq. And one message came through
loud and clear: Failure in Iraq would be a disaster for the United
States.
The consequences of failure are clear: Radical Islamic
extremists would grow in strength and gain new recruits. They
would be in a better position to topple moderate governments,
create chaos in the region, and use oil revenues to fund their
ambitions. Iran would be emboldened in its pursuit of nuclear
weapons. Our enemies would have a safe haven from which to plan
and launch attacks on the American people. On September the 11th,
2001, we saw what a refuge for extremists on the other side of the
world could bring to the streets of our own cities. For the safety of
our people, America must succeed in Iraq.
The most urgent priority for success in Iraq is security,
especially in Baghdad. Eighty percent of Iraq’s sectarian violence
occurs within 30 miles of the capital. This violence is splitting
Baghdad into sectarian enclaves, and shaking the confidence of all
Iraqis. Only Iraqis can end the sectarian violence and secure their
people. And their government has put forward an aggressive plan
to do it.
Our past efforts to secure Baghdad failed for two principal
reasons: There were not enough Iraqi and American troops to
secure neighborhoods that had been cleared of terrorists and
insurgents. And there were too many restrictions on the troops we
did have. Our military commanders reviewed the new Iraqi plan
to ensure that it addressed these mistakes. They report that it does.
They also report that this plan can work.
Now let me explain the main elements of this effort: The Iraqi
government will appoint a military commander and two deputy
commanders for their capital. The Iraqi government will deploy
————
448

Iraqi Army and National Police brigades across Baghdad’s nine
districts. When these forces are fully deployed, there will be 18
Iraqi Army and National Police brigades committed to this effort,
along with local police. These Iraqi forces will operate from local
police stations — conducting patrols and setting up checkpoints,
and going door-to-door to gain the trust of Baghdad residents.
This is a strong commitment. But for it to succeed, our
commanders say the Iraqis will need our help. So America will
change our strategy to help the Iraqis carry out their campaign
to put down sectarian violence and bring security to the people
of Baghdad. This will require increasing American force levels.
So I’ve committed more than 20,000 additional American troops
to Iraq. The vast majority of them — five brigades — will be
deployed to Baghdad. These troops will work alongside Iraqi units
and be embedded in their formations. Our troops will have a welldefined mission: to help Iraqis clear and secure neighborhoods, to
help them protect the local population, and to help ensure that the
Iraqi forces left behind are capable of providing the security that
Baghdad needs.
Many listening tonight will ask why this effort will succeed
when previous operations to secure Baghdad did not. Well, here
are the differences: In earlier operations, Iraqi and American forces
cleared many neighborhoods of terrorists and insurgents, but when
our forces moved on to other targets, the killers returned. This
time, we’ll have the force levels we need to hold the areas that
have been cleared. In earlier operations, political and sectarian
interference prevented Iraqi and American forces from going
into neighborhoods that are home to those fueling the sectarian
violence. This time, Iraqi and American forces will have a green
light to enter those neighborhoods — and Prime Minister Maliki
has pledged that political or sectarian interference will not be
tolerated.
I’ve made it clear to the Prime Minister and Iraq’s other
leaders that America’s commitment is not open-ended. If the Iraqi
government does not follow through on its promises, it will lose
————
449

the support of the American people — and it will lose the support
of the Iraqi people. Now is the time to act. The Prime Minister
understands this. Here is what he told his people just last week:
“The Baghdad security plan will not provide a safe haven for any
outlaws, regardless of [their] sectarian or political affiliation.”
This new strategy will not yield an immediate end to suicide
bombings, assassinations, or IED attacks. Our enemies in Iraq
will make every effort to ensure that our television screens are
filled with images of death and suffering. Yet over time, we can
expect to see Iraqi troops chasing down murderers, fewer brazen
acts of terror, and growing trust and cooperation from Baghdad’s
residents. When this happens, daily life will improve, Iraqis will
gain confidence in their leaders, and the government will have the
breathing space it needs to make progress in other critical areas.
Most of Iraq’s Sunni and Shia want to live together in peace — and
reducing the violence in Baghdad will help make reconciliation
possible.
A successful strategy for Iraq goes beyond military operations.
Ordinary Iraqi citizens must see that military operations are
accompanied by visible improvements in their neighborhoods and
communities. So America will hold the Iraqi government to the
benchmarks it has announced.
To establish its authority, the Iraqi government plans to take
responsibility for security in all of Iraq’s provinces by November.
To give every Iraqi citizen a stake in the country’s economy,
Iraq will pass legislation to share oil revenues among all Iraqis.
To show that it is committed to delivering a better life, the
Iraqi government will spend $10 billion of its own money on
reconstruction and infrastructure projects that will create new jobs.
To empower local leaders, Iraqis plan to hold provincial elections
later this year. And to allow more Iraqis to re-enter their nation’s
political life, the government will reform de-Baathification laws,
and establish a fair process for considering amendments to Iraq’s
constitution.
America will change our approach to help the Iraqi
————
450

government as it works to meet these benchmarks. In keeping with
the recommendations of the Iraq Study Group, we will increase the
embedding of American advisers in Iraqi Army units, and partner
a coalition brigade with every Iraqi Army division. We will help
the Iraqis build a larger and better-equipped army, and we will
accelerate the training of Iraqi forces, which remains the essential
U.S. security mission in Iraq. We will give our commanders and
civilians greater flexibility to spend funds for economic assistance.
We will double the number of provincial reconstruction teams.
These teams bring together military and civilian experts to help
local Iraqi communities pursue reconciliation, strengthen the
moderates, and speed the transition to Iraqi self-reliance. And
Secretary Rice will soon appoint a reconstruction coordinator in
Baghdad to ensure better results for economic assistance being
spent in Iraq.
As we make these changes, we will continue to pursue al
Qaeda and foreign fighters. Al Qaeda is still active in Iraq. Its
home base is Anbar Province. Al Qaeda has helped make Anbar
the most violent area of Iraq outside the capital. A captured al
Qaeda document describes the terrorists’ plan to infiltrate and seize
control of the province. This would bring al Qaeda closer to its
goals of taking down Iraq’s democracy, building a radical Islamic
empire, and launching new attacks on the United States at home
and abroad.
Our military forces in Anbar are killing and capturing al
Qaeda leaders, and they are protecting the local population.
Recently, local tribal leaders have begun to show their willingness
to take on al Qaeda. And as a result, our commanders believe we
have an opportunity to deal a serious blow to the terrorists. So I
have given orders to increase American forces in Anbar Province
by 4,000 troops. These troops will work with Iraqi and tribal
forces to keep up the pressure on the terrorists. America’s men and
women in uniform took away al Qaeda’s safe haven in Afghanistan
— and we will not allow them to re-establish it in Iraq.
Succeeding in Iraq also requires defending its territorial
————
451

integrity and stabilizing the region in the face of extremist
challenges. This begins with addressing Iran and Syria. These two
regimes are allowing terrorists and insurgents to use their territory
to move in and out of Iraq. Iran is providing material support for
attacks on American troops. We will disrupt the attacks on our
forces. We’ll interrupt the flow of support from Iran and Syria.
And we will seek out and destroy the networks providing advanced
weaponry and training to our enemies in Iraq.
We’re also taking other steps to bolster the security of Iraq and
protect American interests in the Middle East. I recently ordered
the deployment of an additional carrier strike group to the region.
We will expand intelligence-sharing and deploy Patriot air defense
systems to reassure our friends and allies. We will work with the
governments of Turkey and Iraq to help them resolve problems
along their border. And we will work with others to prevent Iran
from gaining nuclear weapons and dominating the region.
We will use America’s full diplomatic resources to rally
support for Iraq from nations throughout the Middle East.
Countries like Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, and the Gulf States
need to understand that an American defeat in Iraq would create a
new sanctuary for extremists and a strategic threat to their survival.
These nations have a stake in a successful Iraq that is at peace with
its neighbors, and they must step up their support for Iraq’s unity
government. We endorse the Iraqi government’s call to finalize an
International Compact that will bring new economic assistance in
exchange for greater economic reform. And on Friday, Secretary
Rice will leave for the region, to build support for Iraq and
continue the urgent diplomacy required to help bring peace to the
Middle East.
The challenge playing out across the broader Middle East is
more than a military conflict. It is the decisive ideological struggle
of our time. On one side are those who believe in freedom and
moderation. On the other side are extremists who kill the innocent,
and have declared their intention to destroy our way of life. In the
long run, the most realistic way to protect the American people
————
452

is to provide a hopeful alternative to the hateful ideology of the
enemy, by advancing liberty across a troubled region. It is in the
interests of the United States to stand with the brave men and
women who are risking their lives to claim their freedom, and to
help them as they work to raise up just and hopeful societies across
the Middle East.
From Afghanistan to Lebanon to the Palestinian Territories,
millions of ordinary people are sick of the violence, and want a
future of peace and opportunity for their children. And they are
looking at Iraq. They want to know: Will America withdraw and
yield the future of that country to the extremists, or will we stand
with the Iraqis who have made the choice for freedom?
The changes I have outlined tonight are aimed at ensuring
the survival of a young democracy that is fighting for its life in a
part of the world of enormous importance to American security.
Let me be clear: The terrorists and insurgents in Iraq are without
conscience, and they will make the year ahead bloody and violent.
Even if our new strategy works exactly as planned, deadly acts
of violence will continue — and we must expect more Iraqi and
American casualties. The question is whether our new strategy will
bring us closer to success. I believe that it will.
Victory will not look like the ones our fathers and grandfathers
achieved. There will be no surrender ceremony on the deck of a
battleship. But victory in Iraq will bring something new in the Arab
world — a functioning democracy that polices its territory, upholds
the rule of law, respects fundamental human liberties, and answers
to its people. A democratic Iraq will not be perfect. But it will be
a country that fights terrorists instead of harboring them — and it
will help bring a future of peace and security for our children and
our grandchildren.
This new approach comes after consultations with Congress
about the different courses we could take in Iraq. Many are
concerned that the Iraqis are becoming too dependent on the
United States, and therefore, our policy should focus on protecting
Iraq’s borders and hunting down al Qaeda. Their solution is to
————
453

scale back America’s efforts in Baghdad — or announce the phased
withdrawal of our combat forces. We carefully considered these
proposals. And we concluded that to step back now would force a
collapse of the Iraqi government, tear the country apart, and result
in mass killings on an unimaginable scale. Such a scenario would
result in our troops being forced to stay in Iraq even longer, and
confront an enemy that is even more lethal. If we increase our
support at this crucial moment, and help the Iraqis break the current
cycle of violence, we can hasten the day our troops begin coming
home.
In the days ahead, my national security team will fully brief
Congress on our new strategy. If members have improvements that
can be made, we will make them. If circumstances change, we will
adjust. Honorable people have different views, and they will voice
their criticisms. It is fair to hold our views up to scrutiny. And all
involved have a responsibility to explain how the path they propose
would be more likely to succeed.
Acting on the good advice of Senator Joe Lieberman and
other key members of Congress, we will form a new, bipartisan
working group that will help us come together across party lines
to win the war on terror. This group will meet regularly with me
and my administration; it will help strengthen our relationship with
Congress. We can begin by working together to increase the size of
the active Army and Marine Corps, so that America has the Armed
Forces we need for the 21st century. We also need to examine ways
to mobilize talented American civilians to deploy overseas, where
they can help build democratic institutions in communities and
nations recovering from war and tyranny.
In these dangerous times, the United States is blessed to have
extraordinary and selfless men and women willing to step forward
and defend us. These young Americans understand that our cause
in Iraq is noble and necessary — and that the advance of freedom
is the calling of our time. They serve far from their families, who
make the quiet sacrifices of lonely holidays and empty chairs at the
dinner table. They have watched their comrades give their lives to
————
454

ensure our liberty. We mourn the loss of every fallen American —
and we owe it to them to build a future worthy of their sacrifice.
Fellow citizens: The year ahead will demand more patience,
sacrifice, and resolve. It can be tempting to think that America
can put aside the burdens of freedom. Yet times of testing reveal
the character of a nation. And throughout our history, Americans
have always defied the pessimists and seen our faith in freedom
redeemed. Now America is engaged in a new struggle that will set
the course for a new century. We can, and we will, prevail.
We go forward with trust that the Author of Liberty will guide
us through these trying hours. Thank you and good night.


Welcome to the White House.
The Medal of Honor is the highest award for valor a President
can bestow. The Medal is given for gallantry in the face of an
enemy attack that is above and beyond the call of duty. The Medal
is part of a cherished American tradition that began in this house
with the signature of President Abraham Lincoln.
Since World War II, more than half of those who have been
awarded the Medal of Honor have lost their lives in the action that
earned it. Corporal Jason Dunham belongs to this select group. On
a dusty road in western Iraq, Corporal Dunham gave his own life so
that the men under his command might live. This morning it’s my
privilege to recognize Corporal Dunham’s devotion to the Corps
and country — and to present his family with the Medal of Honor.
I welcome the Vice President’s presence, Secretary of Defense
Bob Gates, Senator Ted Stevens, Senator John McCain, Senator
Craig Thomas — I don’t know if you say former Marine, or
Marine. Marine. Congressman Bill Young and his wife, Beverly;
Congressman Duncan Hunter; Congressman John Kline, Marine;
Congressman Randy Kuhl, Corporal Dunham’s family’s United
States Congressman is with us. Secretary Don Winter; General
Pete Pace; General Jim Conway and Annette; Sergeant Major John
Estrada, Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps.
I appreciate the Medal of Honor recipients who have joined us:
Barney Barnum, Bob Foley, Bob Howard, Gary Littrell, Al Rascon,
Brian Thacker. Thanks for joining us.
I appreciate the Dunhams who have joined us, and will soon
join me on this platform to receive the honor on behalf of their son:
Dan and Deb Dunham; Justin Dunham and Kyle Dunham, brothers;
Katie Dunham, sister; and a lot of other family members who have
————
457

joined us today.
I appreciate the Chaplain for the Navy — excuse me, for the
Marine Corps. I didn’t mean to insult you.
I thank Major Trent Gibson — he was Jason Dunham’s
commander — company commander; First Lieutenant Brian
Robinson, who was his platoon commander. I welcome all the
Marines from “Kilo-3-7” — thanks for coming, and thanks for
serving.
Long before he earned our nation’s highest Medal Jason
Dunham made himself — made a name for himself among his
friends and neighbors. He was born in a small town in upstate New
York. He was a normal kind of fellow, he loved sports. He went to
Scio Central School, and he starred on the Tiger basketball, soccer,
and baseball teams. And by the way, he still holds the record for
the highest batting average in a single season at .414. He was
popular with his teammates, and that could be a problem for his
mom. You see, she never quite knew how many people would
be showing up for dinner, whether it be her family, or the entire
basketball team.
He grew up with the riches far more important than money:
He had a dad who loved to take his boys on a ride with him when
he made his rounds on the dairy farm where he worked. His mom
was a school teacher. She figured out the best way to improve her
son’s spelling was to combine his love for sports with her ability
to educate. And so she taught him the words from his reading list
when they played the basketball game of “horse.” He had two
brothers and a sister who adored him.
He had a natural gift for leadership, and a compassion that led
him to take others under his wing. The Marine Corps took the best
of this young man, and made it better. As a Marine, he was taught
that honor, courage and commitment are not just words. They’re
core values for a way of life that elevates service above self. As a
Marine, Jason was taught that leaders put the needs of their men
before their own. He was taught that while America’s founding
truths are self-evident, they also need to be defended by good men
————
458

and women willing to stand up to determined enemies.
As a leader of a rifle squad in Iraq, Corporal Dunham lived by
the values he had been taught. He was a guy everybody looked
up to. He was a Marine’s Marine who led by example. He was
the kind of person who would stop patrols to play street soccer
with the Iraqi schoolchildren. He was the guy who signed on for
an extra two months in Iraq so he could stay with his squad. As
he explained it, he wanted to “make sure that everyone makes it
home alive.” Corporal Dunham took that promise seriously and
would give his own life to make it good.
In April 2004, during an attack near Iraq’s Syrian border,
Corporal Dunham was assaulted by an insurgent who jumped out
of a vehicle that was about to be searched. As Corporal Dunham
wrestled the man to the ground, the insurgent rolled out a grenade
he had been hiding. Corporal Dunham did not hesitate. He jumped
on the grenade, using his helmet and body to absorb the blast.
Although he survived the initial explosion, he did not survive his
wounds. But by his selflessness, Corporal Dunham saved the lives
of two of his men, and showed the world what it means to be a
Marine.
Deb Dunham calls the Marine Corps her son’s second family
and she means that literally. Deb describes her son’s relationship
to his men this way: “Jay was part guardian angel, part big brother,
and all Marine.” She remembers her son calling from the barracks,
and then passing the phone to one of his Marines, saying, “I’ve got
a guy here who just needs to talk to a mom.” Now it’s the Marines
who comfort her. On special days, like Christmas or Mother’s Day
or her birthday, Deb has learned the day will not pass without one
of Jason’s fellow Marines calling to check on her.
With this Medal we pay tribute to the courage and leadership
of a man who represents the best of young Americans. With this
Medal we ask the God who commands us to love our neighbor as
ourselves to wrap his arms around the family of Corporal Jason
Dunham, a Marine who is not here today because he lived that
commandment to the fullest. I now invite the Dunhams to join me
————
459

on the stage. And, Colonel, please read the citation.


Thank you very much. And tonight, I have a high privilege and
distinct honor of my own — as the first President to begin the State
of the Union message with these words: Madam Speaker.
In his day, the late Congressman Thomas D’Alesandro, Jr.
from Baltimore, Maryland, saw Presidents Roosevelt and Truman
at this rostrum. But nothing could compare with the sight of his
only daughter, Nancy, presiding tonight as Speaker of the House of
Representatives. Congratulations, Madam Speaker.
Two members of the House and Senate are not with us tonight,
and we pray for the recovery and speedy return of Senator Tim
Johnson and Congressman Charlie Norwood.
Madam Speaker, Vice President Cheney, members of Congress,
distinguished guests, and fellow citizens:
The rite of custom brings us together at a defining hour —
when decisions are hard and courage is needed. We enter the year
2007 with large endeavors underway, and others that are ours to
begin. In all of this, much is asked of us. We must have the will
to face difficult challenges and determined enemies — and the
wisdom to face them together.
Some in this chamber are new to the House and the Senate —
and I congratulate the Democrat majority. Congress has changed,
but not our responsibilities. Each of us is guided by our own
convictions — and to these we must stay faithful. Yet we’re all held
to the same standards, and called to serve the same good purposes:
To extend this nation’s prosperity; to spend the people’s money
wisely; to solve problems, not leave them to future generations; to
guard America against all evil; and to keep faith with those we have
sent forth to defend us.
We’re not the first to come here with a government divided and
————
461

uncertainty in the air. Like many before us, we can work through
our differences, and achieve big things for the American people.
Our citizens don’t much care which side of the aisle we sit on —
as long as we’re willing to cross that aisle when there is work to be
done. Our job is to make life better for our fellow Americans, and
to help them to build a future of hope and opportunity — and this
is the business before us tonight.
A future of hope and opportunity begins with a growing
economy — and that is what we have. We’re now in the 41st
month of uninterrupted job growth, in a recovery that has created
7.2 million new jobs — so far. Unemployment is low, inflation
is low, and wages are rising. This economy is on the move, and
our job is to keep it that way, not with more government, but with
more enterprise.
Next week, I’ll deliver a full report on the state of our
economy. Tonight, I want to discuss three economic reforms that
deserve to be priorities for this Congress.
First, we must balance the federal budget. We can do so
without raising taxes. What we need to do is impose spending
discipline in Washington, D.C. We set a goal of cutting the deficit
in half by 2009, and met that goal three years ahead of schedule.
Now let us take the next step. In the coming weeks, I will submit
a budget that eliminates the federal deficit within the next five
years. I ask you to make the same commitment. Together, we can
restrain the spending appetite of the federal government, and we
can balance the federal budget.
Next, there is the matter of earmarks. These special interest
items are often slipped into bills at the last hour — when not even
C-SPAN is watching. In 2005 alone, the number of earmarks grew
to over 13,000 and totaled nearly $18 billion. Even worse, over 90
percent of earmarks never make it to the floor of the House and
Senate — they are dropped into committee reports that are not
even part of the bill that arrives on my desk. You didn’t vote them
into law. I didn’t sign them into law. Yet, they’re treated as if they
have the force of law. The time has come to end this practice. So
————
462

let us work together to reform the budget process, expose every
earmark to the light of day and to a vote in Congress, and cut the
number and cost of earmarks at least in half by the end of this
session.
And, finally, to keep this economy strong we must take on
the challengeof entitlements. Social Security and Medicare and
Medicaid are commitments of conscience, and so it is our duty to
keep them permanently sound. Yet, we’re failing in that duty. And
this failure will one day leave our children with three bad options:
huge tax increases, huge deficits, or huge and immediate cuts in
benefits. Everyone in this chamber knows this to be true — yet
somehow we have not found it in ourselves to act. So let us work
together and do it now. With enough good sense and goodwill, you
and I can fix Medicare and Medicaid — and save Social Security.
Spreading opportunity and hope in America also requires
public schools that give children the knowledge and character they
need in life. Five years ago, we rose above partisan differences
to pass the No Child Left Behind Act, preserving local control,
raising standards, and holding those schools accountable for
results. And because we acted, students are performing better
in reading and math, and minority students are closing the
achievement gap.
Now the task is to build on the success, without watering
down standards, without taking control from local communities,
and without backsliding and calling it reform. We can lift student
achievement even higher by giving local leaders flexibility to turn
around failing schools, and by giving families with children stuck
in failing schools the right to choose someplace better. We must
increase funds for students who struggle — and make sure these
children get the special help they need. And we can make sure our
children are prepared for the jobs of the future and our country is
more competitive by strengthening math and science skills. The
No Child Left Behind Act has worked for America’s children —
and I ask Congress to reauthorize this good law.
A future of hope and opportunity requires that all our citizens
————
463

have affordable and available health care. When it comes to health
care, government has an obligation to care for the elderly, the
disabled, and poor children. And we will meet those responsibilities.
For all other Americans, private health insurance is the best way
to meet their needs. But many Americans cannot afford a health
insurance policy.
And so tonight, I propose two new initiatives to help more
Americans afford their own insurance. First, I propose a standard
tax deduction for health insurance that will be like the standard tax
deduction for dependents. Families with health insurance will pay
no income on payroll tax — or payroll taxes on $15,000 of their
income. Single Americans with health insurance will pay no income
or payroll taxes on $7,500 of their income. With this reform, more
than 100 million men, women, and children who are now covered
by employer-provided insurance will benefit from lower tax bills.
At the same time, this reform will level the playing field for those
who do not get health insurance through their job. For Americans
who now purchase health insurance on their own, this proposal
would mean a substantial tax savings — $4,500 for a family of four
making $60,000 a year. And for the millions of other Americans
who have no health insurance at all, this deduction would help put
a basic private health insurance plan within their reach. Changing
the tax code is a vital and necessary step to making health care
affordable for more Americans.
My second proposal is to help the states that are coming up
with innovative ways to cover the uninsured. States that make basic
private health insurance available to all their citizens should receive
federal funds to help them provide this coverage to the poor and the
sick. I have asked the Secretary of Health and Human Services to
work with Congress to take existing federal funds and use them to
create “Affordable Choices” grants. These grants would give our
nation’s governors more money and more flexibility to get private
health insurance to those most in need.
There are many other ways that Congress can help. We need to
expand Health Savings Accounts. We need to help small businesses
————
464

through Association Health Plans. We need to reduce costs and
medical errors with better information technology. We will
encourage price transparency. And to protect good doctors from
junk lawsuits, we passing medical liability reform. In all we do,
we must remember that the best health care decisions are made not
by government and insurance companies, but by patients and their
doctors.
Extending hope and opportunity in our country requires an
immigration system worthy of America — with laws that are fair
and borders that are secure. When laws and borders are routinely
violated, this harms the interests of our country. To secure our
border, we’re doubling the size of the Border Patrol, and funding
new infrastructure and technology.
Yet even with all these steps, we cannot fully secure the
border unless we take pressure off the border — and that requires
a temporary worker program. We should establish a legal and
orderly path for foreign workers to enter our country to work on a
temporary basis. As a result, they won’t have to try to sneak in, and
that will leave Border Agents free to chase down drug smugglers
and criminals and terrorists. We’ll enforce our immigration laws at
the work site and give employers the tools to verify the legal status
of their workers, so there’s no excuse left for violating the law.
We need to uphold the great tradition of the melting pot that
welcomes and assimilates new arrivals. We need to resolve the
status of the illegal immigrants who are already in our country
without animosity and without amnesty. Convictions run deep in
this Capitol when it comes to immigration. Let us have a serious,
civil, and conclusive debate, so that you can pass, and I can sign,
comprehensive immigration reform into law.
Extending hope and opportunity depends on a stable supply
of energy that keeps America’s economy running and America’s
environment clean. For too long our nation has been dependent
on foreign oil. And this dependence leaves us more vulnerable
to hostile regimes, and to terrorists — who could cause huge
disruptions of oil shipments, and raise the price of oil, and do great
————
465

harm to our economy.
It’s in our vital interest to diversify America’s energy supply —
the way forward is through technology. We must continue changing
the way America generates electric power, by even greater use
of clean coal technology, solar and wind energy, and clean, safe
nuclear power. We need to press on with battery research for plugin and hybrid vehicles, and expand the use of clean diesel vehicles
and biodiesel fuel. We must continue investing in new methods of
producing ethanol using everything from wood chips to grasses, to
agricultural wastes.
We made a lot of progress, thanks to good policies here in
Washington and the strong response of the market. And now even
more dramatic advances are within reach. Tonight, I ask Congress
to join me in pursuing a great goal. Let us build on the work we’ve
done and reduce gasoline usage in the United States by 20 percent
in the next 10 years. When we do that we will have cut our total
imports by the equivalent of three-quarters of all the oil we now
import from the Middle East.
To reach this goal, we must increase the supply of alternative
fuels, by setting a mandatory fuels standard to require 35 billion
gallons of renewable and alternative fuels in 2017 — and that is
nearly five times the current target. At the same time, we need to
reform and modernize fuel economy standards for cars the way we
did for light trucks — and conserve up to 8.5 billion more gallons
of gasoline by 2017.
Achieving these ambitious goals will dramatically reduce our
dependence on foreign oil, but it’s not going to eliminate it. And
so as we continue to diversify our fuel supply, we must step up
domestic oil production in environmentally sensitive ways. And to
further protect America against severe disruptions to our oil supply,
I ask Congress to double the current capacity of the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve.
America is on the verge of technological breakthroughs that
will enable us to live our lives less dependent on oil. And these
technologies will help us be better stewards of the environment,
————
466

and they will help us to confront the serious challenge of global
climate change.
A future of hope and opportunity requires a fair, impartial
system of justice. The lives of our citizens across our nation are
affected by the outcome of cases pending in our federal courts.
We have a shared obligation to ensure that the federal courts have
enough judges to hear those cases and deliver timely rulings. As
President, I have a duty to nominate qualified men and women to
vacancies on the federal bench. And the United States Senate has a
duty, as well, to give those nominees a fair hearing, and a prompt
up-or-down vote on the Senate floor.
For all of us in this room, there is no higher responsibility than
to protect the people of this country from danger. Five years have
come and gone since we saw the scenes and felt the sorrow that the
terrorists can cause. We’ve had time to take stock of our situation.
We’ve added many critical protections to guard the homeland. We
know with certainty that the horrors of that September morning
were just a glimpse of what the terrorists intend for us — unless
we stop them.
With the distance of time, we find ourselves debating the
causes of conflict and the course we have followed. Such debates
are essential when a great democracy faces great questions. Yet one
question has surely been settled: that to win the war on terror we
must take the fight to the enemy.
From the start, America and our allies have protected our
people by staying on the offense. The enemy knows that the days
of comfortable sanctuary, easy movement, steady financing, and
free flowing communications are long over. For the terrorists, life
since 9/11 has never been the same.
Our success in this war is often measured by the things that
did not happen. We cannot know the full extent of the attacks that
we and our allies have prevented, but here is some of what we do
know: We stopped an al Qaeda plot to fly a hijacked airplane into
the tallest building on the West Coast. We broke up a Southeast
Asian terror cell grooming operatives for attacks inside the United
————
467

States. We uncovered an al Qaeda cell developing anthrax to be
used in attacks against America. And just last August, British
authorities uncovered a plot to blow up passenger planes bound for
America over the Atlantic Ocean. For each life saved, we owe a
debt of gratitude to the brave public servants who devote their lives
to finding the terrorists and stopping them.
Every success against the terrorists is a reminder of the
shoreless ambitions of this enemy. The evil that inspired and
rejoiced in 9/11 is still at work in the world. And so long as that’s
the case, America is still a nation at war.
In the mind of the terrorist, this war began well before
September the 11th, and will not end until their radical vision is
fulfilled. And these past five years have given us a much clearer
view of the nature of this enemy. Al Qaeda and its followers are
Sunni extremists, possessed by hatred and commanded by a harsh
and narrow ideology. Take almost any principle of civilization,
and their goal is the opposite. They preach with threats, instruct
with bullets and bombs, and promise paradise for the murder of the
innocent.
Our enemies are quite explicit about their intentions. They want
to overthrow moderate governments, and establish safe havens from
which to plan and carry out new attacks on our country. By killing
and terrorizing Americans, they want to force our country to retreat
from the world and abandon the cause of liberty. They would then
be free to impose their will and spread their totalitarian ideology.
Listen to this warning from the late terrorist Zarqawi: “We will
sacrifice our blood and bodies to put an end to your dreams, and
what is coming is even worse.” Osama bin Laden declared: “Death
is better than living on this Earth with the unbelievers among us.”
These men are not given to idle words, and they are just one
camp in the Islamist radical movement. In recent times, it has also
become clear that we face an escalating danger from Shia extremists
who are just as hostile to America, and are also determined to
dominate the Middle East. Many are known to take direction from
the regime in Iran, which is funding and arming terrorists like
————
468

Hezbollah — a group second only to al Qaeda in the American
lives it has taken.
The Shia and Sunni extremists are different faces of the
same totalitarian threat. Whatever slogans they chant, when they
slaughter the innocent they have the same wicked purposes. They
want to kill Americans, kill democracy in the Middle East, and gain
the weapons to kill on an even more horrific scale.
In the sixth year since our nation was attacked, I wish I could
report to you that the dangers had ended. They have not. And
so it remains the policy of this government to use every lawful
and proper tool of intelligence, diplomacy, law enforcement, and
military action to do our duty, to find these enemies, and to protect
the American people.
This war is more than a clash of arms — it is a decisive
ideological struggle, and the security of our nation is in the
balance. To prevail, we must remove the conditions that inspire
blind hatred, and drove 19 men to get onto airplanes and to come
and kill us. What every terrorist fears most is human freedom —
societies where men and women make their own choices, answer
to their own conscience, and live by their hopes instead of their
resentments. Free people are not drawn to violent and malignant
ideologies — and most will choose a better way when they’re
given a chance. So we advance our own security interests by
helping moderates and reformers and brave voices for democracy.
The great question of our day is whether America will help men
and women in the Middle East to build free societies and share
in the rights of all humanity. And I say, for the sake of our own
security, we must.
In the last two years, we’ve seen the desire for liberty in the
broader Middle East — and we have been sobered by the enemy’s
fierce reaction. In 2005, the world watched as the citizens of
Lebanon raised the banner of the Cedar Revolution, they drove
out the Syrian occupiers and chose new leaders in free elections.
In 2005, the people of Afghanistan defied the terrorists and elected
a democratic legislature. And in 2005, the Iraqi people held three
————
469

national elections, choosing a transitional government, adopting
the most progressive, democratic constitution in the Arab world,
and then electing a government under that constitution. Despite
endless threats from the killers in their midst, nearly 12 million
Iraqi citizens came out to vote in a show of hope and solidarity
that we should never forget.
A thinking enemy watched all of these scenes, adjusted their
tactics, and in 2006 they struck back. In Lebanon, assassins took
the life of Pierre Gemayel, a prominent participant in the Cedar
Revolution. Hezbollah terrorists, with support from Syria and
Iran, sowed conflict in the region and are seeking to undermine
Lebanon’s legitimately elected government. In Afghanistan,
Taliban and al Qaeda fighters tried to regain power by regrouping
and engaging Afghan and NATO forces. In Iraq, al Qaeda and
other Sunni extremists blew up one of the most sacred places
in Shia Islam — the Golden Mosque of Samarra. This atrocity,
directed at a Muslim house of prayer, was designed to provoke
retaliation from Iraqi Shia — and it succeeded. Radical Shia
elements, some of whom receive support from Iran, formed death
squads. The result was a tragic escalation of sectarian rage and
reprisal that continues to this day.
This is not the fight we entered in Iraq, but it is the fight
we’re in. Every one of us wishes this war were over and won. Yet
it would not be like us to leave our promises unkept, our friends
abandoned, and our own security at risk. Ladies and gentlemen:
On this day, at this hour, it is still within our power to shape the
outcome of this battle. Let us find our resolve, and turn events
toward victory.
We’re carrying out a new strategy in Iraq — a plan that
demands more from Iraq’s elected government, and gives our
forces in Iraq the reinforcements they need to complete their
mission. Our goal is a democratic Iraq that upholds the rule of law,
respects the rights of its people, provides them security, and is an
ally in the war on terror.
In order to make progress toward this goal, the Iraqi
————
470

government must stop the sectarian violence in its capital. But
the Iraqis are not yet ready to do this on their own. So we’re
deploying reinforcements of more than 20,000 additional soldiers
and Marines to Iraq. The vast majority will go to Baghdad, where
they will help Iraqi forces to clear and secure neighborhoods, and
serve as advisers embedded in Iraqi Army units. With Iraqis in
the lead, our forces will help secure the city by chasing down the
terrorists, insurgents, and the roaming death squads. And in Anbar
Province, where al Qaeda terrorists have gathered and local forces
have begun showing a willingness to fight them, we’re sending
an additional 4,000 United States Marines, with orders to find the
terrorists and clear them out. We didn’t drive al Qaeda out of their
safe haven in Afghanistan only to let them set up a new safe haven
in a free Iraq.
The people of Iraq want to live in peace, and now it’s
time for their government to act. Iraq’s leaders know that our
commitment is not open-ended. They have promised to deploy
more of their own troops to secure Baghdad — and they must do
so. They pledged that they will confront violent radicals of any
faction or political party — and they need to follow through, and
lift needless restrictions on Iraqi and coalition forces, so these
troops can achieve their mission of bringing security to all of the
people of Baghdad. Iraq’s leaders have committed themselves
to a series of benchmarks — to achieve reconciliation, to share
oil revenues among all of Iraq’s citizens, to put the wealth of
Iraq into the rebuilding of Iraq, to allow more Iraqis to re-enter
their nation’s civic life, to hold local elections, and to take
responsibility for security in every Iraqi province. But for all of
this to happen, Baghdad must be secure. And our plan will help
the Iraqi government take back its capital and make good on its
commitments.
My fellow citizens, our military commanders and I have
carefully weighed the options. We discussed every possible
approach. In the end, I chose this course of action because it
provides the best chance for success. Many in this chamber
————
471

understand that America must not fail in Iraq, because you
understand that the consequences of failure would be grievous and
far-reaching.
If American forces step back before Baghdad is secure, the
Iraqi government would be overrun by extremists on all sides. We
could expect an epic battle between Shia extremists backed by
Iran, and Sunni extremists aided by al Qaeda and supporters of
the old regime. A contagion of violence could spill out across the
country — and in time, the entire region could be drawn into the
conflict.
For America, this is a nightmare scenario. For the enemy,
this is the objective. Chaos is the greatest ally — their greatest
ally in this struggle. And out of chaos in Iraq would emerge an
emboldened enemy with new safe havens, new recruits, new
resources, and an even greater determination to harm America. To
allow this to happen would be to ignore the lessons of September
the 11th and invite tragedy. Ladies and gentlemen, nothing is
more important at this moment in our history than for America
to succeed in the Middle East, to succeed in Iraq and to spare the
American people from this danger.
This is where matters stand tonight, in the here and now. I
have spoken with many of you in person. I respect you and the
arguments you’ve made. We went into this largely united, in our
assumptions and in our convictions. And whatever you voted for,
you did not vote for failure. Our country is pursuing a new strategy
in Iraq, and I ask you to give it a chance to work. And I ask you to
support our troops in the field, and those on their way.
The war on terror we fight today is a generational struggle that
will continue long after you and I have turned our duties over to
others. And that’s why it’s important to work together so our nation
can see this great effort through. Both parties and both branches
should work in close consultation. It’s why I propose to establish
a special advisory council on the war on terror, made up of leaders
in Congress from both political parties. We will share ideas for
how to position America to meet every challenge that confronts us.
————
472

We’ll show our enemies abroad that we are united in the goal of
victory.
And one of the first steps we can take together is to add to
the ranks of our military so that the American Armed Forces are
ready for all the challenges ahead. Tonight I ask the Congress to
authorize an increase in the size of our active Army and Marine
Corps by 92,000 in the next five years. A second task we can take
on together is to design and establish a volunteer Civilian Reserve
Corps. Such a corps would function much like our military
reserve. It would ease the burden on the Armed Forces by allowing
us to hire civilians with critical skills to serve on missions abroad
when America needs them. It would give people across America
who do not wear the uniform a chance to serve in the defining
struggle of our time.
Americans can have confidence in the outcome of this struggle
because we’re not in this struggle alone. We have a diplomatic
strategy that is rallying the world to join in the fight against
extremism. In Iraq, multinational forces are operating under a
mandate from the United Nations. We’re working with Jordan and
Saudi Arabia and Egypt and the Gulf States to increase support for
Iraq’s government.
The United Nations has imposed sanctions on Iran, and made
it clear that the world will not allow the regime in Tehran to
acquire nuclear weapons. With the other members of the Quartet
— the U.N., the European Union, and Russia — we’re pursuing
diplomacy to help bring peace to the Holy Land, and pursuing the
establishment of a democratic Palestinian state living side-by-side
with Israel in peace and security. In Afghanistan, NATO has taken
the lead in turning back the Taliban and al Qaeda offensive —
the first time the Alliance has deployed forces outside the North
Atlantic area. Together with our partners in China, Japan, Russia,
and South Korea, we’re pursuing intensive diplomacy to achieve a
Korean Peninsula free of nuclear weapons.
We will continue to speak out for the cause of freedom in
places like Cuba, Belarus, and Burma — and continue to awaken
————
473

the conscience of the world to save the people of Darfur.
American foreign policy is more than a matter of war and
diplomacy. Our work in the world is also based on a timeless truth:
To whom much is given, much is required. We hear the call to
take on the challenges of hunger and poverty and disease — and
that is precisely what America is doing. We must continue to fight
HIV/AIDS, especially on the continent of Africa. Because you
funded our Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, the number of people
receiving life-saving drugs has grown from 50,000 to more than
800,000 in three short years. I ask you to continue funding our
efforts to fight HIV/AIDS. I ask you to provide $1.2 billion over
five years so we can combat malaria in 15 African countries.
I ask that you fund the Millennium Challenge Account, so that
American aid reaches the people who need it, in nations where
democracy is on the rise and corruption is in retreat. And let us
continue to support the expanded trade and debt relief that are the
best hope for lifting lives and eliminating poverty.
When America serves others in this way, we show the strength
and generosity of our country. These deeds reflect the character of
our people. The greatest strength we have is the heroic kindness,
courage, and self-sacrifice of the American people. You see this
spirit often if you know where to look — and tonight we need only
look above to the gallery.
Dikembe Mutombo grew up in Africa, amid great poverty
and disease. He came to Georgetown University on a scholarship
to study medicine — but Coach John Thompson got a look at
Dikembe and had a different idea. Dikembe became a star in the
NBA, and a citizen of the United States. But he never forgot the
land of his birth, or the duty to share his blessings with others. He
built a brand new hospital in his old hometown. A friend has said of
this good-hearted man: “Mutombo believes that God has given him
this opportunity to do great things.” And we are proud to call this
son of the Congo a citizen of the United States of America.
After her daughter was born, Julie Aigner-Clark searched
for ways to share her love of music and art with her child. So she
————
474

borrowed some equipment, and began filming children’s videos
in her basement. The Baby Einstein Company was born, and in
just five years her business grew to more than $20 million in sales.
In November 2001, Julie sold Baby Einstein to the Walt Disney
Company, and with her help Baby Einstein has grown into a $200
million business. Julie represents the great enterprising spirit of
America. And she is using her success to help others — producing
child safety videos with John Walsh of the National Center for
Missing and Exploited Children. Julie says of her new project:
“I believe it’s the most important thing that I have ever done. I
believe that children have the right to live in a world that is safe.”
And so tonight, we are pleased to welcome this talented business
entrepreneur and generous social entrepreneur — Julie AignerClark.
Three weeks ago, Wesley Autrey was waiting at a Harlem
subway station with his two little girls, when he saw a man fall into
the path of a train. With seconds to act, Wesley jumped onto the
tracks, pulled the man into the space between the rails, and held
him as the train passed right above their heads. He insists he’s not a
hero. He says: “We got guys and girls overseas dying for us to have
our freedoms. We have got to show each other some love.” There
is something wonderful about a country that produces a brave and
humble man like Wesley Autrey.
Tommy Rieman was a teenager pumping gas in Independence,
Kentucky, when he enlisted in the United States Army. In December
2003, he was on a reconnaissance mission in Iraq when his team
came under heavy enemy fire. From his Humvee, Sergeant Rieman
returned fire; he used his body as a shield to protect his gunner. He
was shot in the chest and arm, and received shrapnel wounds to his
legs — yet he refused medical attention, and stayed in the fight.
He helped to repel a second attack, firing grenades at the enemy’s
position. For his exceptional courage, Sergeant Rieman was
awarded the Silver Star. And like so many other Americans who
have volunteered to defend us, he has earned the respect and the
gratitude of our entire country.
————
475

In such courage and compassion, ladies and gentlemen, we
see the spirit and character of America — and these qualities are
not in short supply. This is a decent and honorable country —
and resilient, too. We’ve been through a lot together. We’ve met
challenges and faced dangers, and we know that more lie ahead.
Yet we can go forward with confidence — because the State of our
Union is strong, our cause in the world is right, and tonight that
cause goes on. God bless.
See you next year. Thank you for your prayers.

President Ilves, Foreign Minister Schwarzenberg,
distinguished guests: Laura and I are pleased to be back in Prague,
and we appreciate the gracious welcome in this historic hall.
Tomorrow I attend the G-8 Summit, where I will meet with the
leaders of the world’s most powerful economies. This afternoon, I
stand with men and women who represent an even greater power
— the power of human conscience.
In this room are dissidents and democratic activists from 17
countries on five continents. You follow different traditions, you
practice different faiths, and you face different challenges. But you
are united by an unwavering conviction: that freedom is the nonnegotiable right of every man, woman, and child, and that the path
to lasting peace in our world is liberty.
This conference was conceived by three of the great advocates
for freedom in our time: Jose Maria Aznar, Vaclav Havel, and
Natan Sharansky. I thank them for the invitation to address this
inspiring assembly, and for showing the world that an individual
with moral clarity and courage can change the course of history.
It is fitting that we meet in the Czech Republic — a nation
at the heart of Europe, and of the struggle for freedom on this
continent. Nine decades ago, Tomas Masaryk proclaimed
Czechoslovakia’s independence based on the “ideals of modern
democracy.” That democracy was interrupted, first by the Nazis
and then by the communists, who seized power in a shameful coup
that left the Foreign Minister dead in the courtyard of this palace.
Through the long darkness of Soviet occupation, the true face
of this nation was never in doubt. The world saw it in the reforms
of the Prague Spring and the principled demands of Charter 77.
————
477

Those efforts were met with tanks and truncheons and arrests by
secret police. But the violent would not have the final word. In
1989, thousands gathered in Wenceslas Square to call for their
freedom. Theaters like the Magic Lantern became headquarters
for dissidents. Workers left their factories to support a strike. And
within weeks, the regime crumbled. Vaclav Havel went from
prisoner of state to head of state. And the people of Czechoslovakia
brought down the Iron Curtain with a Velvet Revolution.
Across Europe, similar scenes were unfolding. In Poland, a
movement that began in a single shipyard freed people across a
nation. In Hungary, mourners gathered at Heroes Square to bury
a slain reformer — and bury their communist regime, too. In East
Germany, families came together for prayer meetings — and found
the strength to tear down a wall. Soon, activists emerged from the
attics and church basements to reclaim the streets of Bulgaria, and
Romania, and Albania, and Latvia, and Lithuania, and Estonia. The
Warsaw Pact was dissolved peacefully in this very room. And after
seven decades of oppression, the Soviet Union ceased to exist.
Behind these astonishing achievements was the triumph of
freedom in the battle of ideas. The communists had an imperial
ideology that claimed to know the directions of history. But in
the end, it was overpowered by ordinary people who wanted to
live their lives, and worship their God, and speak the truth to
their children. The communists had the harsh rule of Brezhnev,
and Honecker, and Ceausescu. But in the end, it was no match
for the vision of Walesa and Havel, the defiance of Sakharov
and Sharansky, the resolve of Reagan and Thatcher, and fearless
witness of John Paul. From this experience, a clear lesson has
emerged: Freedom can be resisted, and freedom can be delayed,
but freedom cannot be denied.
In the years since liberation, Central and Eastern European
nations have navigated the difficult transition to democracy.
Leaders made the tough reforms needed to enter NATO and the
European Union. Citizens claimed their freedom in the Balkans
and beyond. And now, after centuries of war and suffering, the
————
478

continent of Europe is at last in peace.
With this new era have come new threats to freedom. In dark
and repressive corners of the world, whole generations grew up
with no voice in their government and no hope in their future. This
life of oppression bred deep resentment. And for many, resentment
boiled over into radicalism and extremism and violence. The world
saw the result on September the 11th, 2001, when terrorists based in
Afghanistan sent 19 suicidal men to murder nearly 3,000 innocent
people in the United States.
For some, this attack called for a narrow response. In truth,
9/11 was evidence of a much broader danger — an international
movement of violent Islamic extremists that threatens free people
everywhere. The extremists’ ambition is to build a totalitarian
empire that spans all current and former Muslim lands, including
parts of Europe. Their strategy to achieve that goal is to frighten
the world into surrender through a ruthless campaign of terrorist
murder.
To confront this enemy, America and our allies have taken the
offensive with the full range of our military, intelligence, and law
enforcement capabilities. Yet this battle is more than a military
conflict. Like the Cold War, it’s an ideological struggle between
two fundamentally different visions of humanity. On one side are
the extremists, who promise paradise, but deliver a life of public
beatings and repression of women and suicide bombings. On the
other side are huge numbers of moderate men and women —
including millions in the Muslim world — who believe that every
human life has dignity and value that no power on Earth can take
away.
The most powerful weapon in the struggle against extremism
is not bullets or bombs — it is the universal appeal of freedom.
Freedom is the design of our Maker, and the longing of every soul.
Freedom is the best way to unleash the creativity and economic
potential of a nation. Freedom is the only ordering of a society that
leads to justice. And human freedom is the only way to achieve
human rights.
————
479

Expanding freedom is more than a moral imperative — it is
the only realistic way to protect our people in the long run. Years
ago, Andrei Sakharov warned that a country that does not respect
the rights of its own people will not respond to the rights of its
neighbors. History proves him right. Governments accountable
to their people do not attack each other. Democracies address
problems through the political process, instead of blaming outside
scapegoats. Young people who can disagree openly with their
leaders are less likely to adopt violent ideologies. And nations that
commit to freedom for their people will not support extremists —
they will join in defeating them.
For all these reasons, the United States is committed to the
advance of freedom and democracy as the great alternatives to
repression and radicalism. And we have a historic objective in
view. In my second inaugural address, I pledged America to the
ultimate goal of ending tyranny in our world. Some have said that
qualifies me as a “dissident president.” If standing for liberty in the
world makes me a dissident, I wear that title with pride.
America pursues our freedom agenda in many ways — some
vocal and visible, others quiet and hidden from view. Ending
tyranny requires support for the forces of conscience that
undermine repressive societies from within. The Soviet dissident
Andrei Amalrik compared a tyrannical state to a soldier who
constantly points a gun at his enemy — until his arms finally
tire and the prisoner escapes. The role of the free world is to put
pressure on the arms of the world’s tyrants — and strengthen the
prisoners who are trying to speed their collapse.
So I meet personally with dissidents and democratic activists
from some of the world’s worst dictatorships — including Belarus,
and Burma, and Cuba, and North Korea, Sudan, and Zimbabwe.
At this conference, I look forward to meeting other dissidents,
including some from Iran and Syria. One of those dissidents is
Mamoun Homsi. In 2001, this man was an independent member
of the Syrian parliament who simply issued a declaration asking
the government to begin respecting human rights. For this entirely
————
480

peaceful act, he was arrested and sent to jail, where he spent
several years beside other innocent advocates for a free Syria.
Another dissident I will meet here is Rebiyah Kadeer of
China, whose sons have been jailed in what we believe is an act of
retaliation for her human rights activities. The talent of men and
women like Rebiyah is the greatest resource of their nations, far
more valuable than the weapons of their army or their oil under the
ground. America calls on every nation that stifles dissent to end its
repression, to trust its people, and to grant its citizens the freedom
they deserve.
There are many dissidents who couldn’t join us because
they are being unjustly imprisoned or held under house arrest. I
look forward to the day when a conference like this one include
Alexander Kozulin of Belarus, Aung San Suu Kyi of Burma, Oscar
Elias Biscet of Cuba, Father Nguyen Van Ly of Vietnam, Ayman
Nour of Egypt. The daughter of one of these political prisoners is
in this room. I would like to say to her, and all the families: I thank
you for your courage. I pray for your comfort and strength. And
I call for the immediate and unconditional release of your loved
ones.
In the eyes of America, the democratic dissidents today are the
democratic leaders of tomorrow. So we’re taking new steps to
strengthen our support. We recently created a Human Rights
Defenders Fund, which provides grants for the legal defense and
medical expenses of activists arrested or beaten by repressive
governments. I strongly support the Prague Document that your
conference plans to issue, which states that “the protection of
human rights is critical to international peace and security.” And in
keeping with the goals of that declaration, I have asked Secretary
Rice to send a directive to every U.S. ambassador in an un-free
nation: Seek out and meet with activists for democracy. Seek out
those who demand human rights.
People living in tyranny need to know they are not forgotten.
North Koreans live in a closed society where dissent is brutally
suppressed, and they are cut off from their brothers and sisters to
————
481

the south. The Iranians are a great people who deserve to chart
their own future, but they are denied their liberty by a handful of
extremists whose pursuit of nuclear weapons prevents their country
from taking its rightful place amongst the thriving. The Cubans
are desperate for freedom — and as that nation enters a period of
transition, we must insist on free elections and free speech and free
assembly. And in Sudan, freedom is denied and basic human rights
are violated by a government that pursues genocide against its own
citizens. My message to all those who suffer under tyranny is this:
We will never excuse your oppressors. We will always stand for
your freedom.
Freedom is also under assault in countries that have shown
some progress. In Venezuela, elected leaders have resorted to
shallow populism to dismantle democratic institutions and tighten
their grip on power. The government of Uzbekistan continues to
silence independent voices by jailing human rights activists. And
Vietnam recently arrested and imprisoned a number of peaceful
religious and political activists.
These developments are discouraging, but there are more
reasons for optimism. At the start of the 1980s, there were only 45
democracies on Earth. There are now more than 120 democracies
— more people now live in freedom than ever before. And it is the
responsibility of those who enjoy the blessings of liberty to help
those who are struggling to establish their free societies. So the
United States has nearly doubled funding for democracy projects.
We’re working with our partners in the G-8 to promote the rise of
a vibrant civil society in the Middle East through initiatives like
the Forum for the Future. We’re cooperating side-by-side with
the new democracies in Ukraine and Georgia and Kyrgyzstan. We
congratulate the people of Yemen on their landmark presidential
election, and the people of Kuwait on elections in which women
were able to vote and run for office for the first time. We stand
firmly behind the people of Lebanon and Afghanistan and Iraq
as they defend their democratic gains against extremist enemies.
These people are making tremendous sacrifices for liberty. They
————
482

deserve the admiration of the free world, and they deserve our
unwavering support.
The United States is also using our influence to urge valued
partners like Egypt and Saudi Arabia and Pakistan to move toward
freedom. These nations have taken brave stands and strong action
to confront extremists, along with some steps to expand liberty
and transparency. Yet they have a great distance still to travel.
The United States will continue to press nations like these to open
up their political systems, and give greater voice to their people.
Inevitably, this creates tension. But our relationships with these
countries are broad enough and deep enough to bear it. As our
relationships with South Korea and Taiwan during the Cold War
prove, America can maintain a friendship and push a nation toward
democracy at the same time.
We’re also applying that lesson to our relationships with Russia
and China. The United States has strong working relationships
with these countries. Our friendship with them is complex. In the
areas where we share mutual interests, we work together. In other
areas, we have strong disagreements. China’s leaders believe that
they can continue to open the nation’s economy without opening
its political system. We disagree. In Russia, reforms that were
once promised to empower citizens have been derailed, with
troubling implications for democratic development. Part of a good
relationship is the ability to talk openly about our disagreements.
So the United States will continue to build our relationships with
these countries — and we will do it without abandoning our
principles or our values.
We appreciate that free societies take shape at different speeds
in different places. One virtue of democracy is that it reflects local
history and traditions. Yet there are fundamental elements that
all democracies share — freedom of speech, religion, press, and
assembly; rule of law enforced by independent courts; private
property rights; and political parties that compete in free and
fair elections. These rights and institutions are the foundation of
human dignity, and as countries find their own path to freedom,
————
483

they must find a loyal partner in the United States of America.
Extending the reach of freedom is a mission that unites
democracies around the world. Some of the greatest contributions
are coming from nations with the freshest memories of tyranny. I
appreciate the Czech Republic’s support for human rights projects
in Belarus and Burma and Cuba. I thank Germany, and Poland,
and the Czech Republic, and Hungary, and Slovenia, and Georgia,
Lithuania, Estonia, Croatia for contributing to the new United
Nations Democracy Fund. I’m grateful for the commitment many
new democracies in Central and Eastern Europe are making to
Afghanistan and Iraq. I appreciate that these countries are willing
to do the hard work necessary to enable people who want to be
free to live in a free society.
In all these ways, the freedom agenda is making a difference.
The work has been difficult, and that is not going to change.
There will be triumphs and failures, progress and setbacks.
Ending tyranny cannot be achieved overnight. And of course, this
objective has its critics.
Some say that ending tyranny means “imposing our values”
on people who do not share them, or that people live in parts of
the world where freedom cannot take hold. That is refuted by
the fact that every time people are given a choice, they choose
freedom. We saw that when the people of Latin America turned
dictatorships into democracies, and the people of South Africa
replaced apartheid with a free society, and the people of Indonesia
ended their long authoritarian rule. We saw it when Ukrainians in
orange scarves demanded that their ballots be counted. We saw it
when millions of Afghans and Iraqis defied the terrorists to elect
free governments. At a polling station in Baghdad, I was struck by
the words of an Iraqi — he had one leg — and he told a reporter,
“I would have crawled here if I had to.” Was democracy — I ask
the critics, was democracy imposed on that man? Was freedom a
value he did not share? The truth is that the only ones who have
to impose their values are the extremists and the radicals and the
tyrants.
————
484

And that is why the communists crushed the Prague Spring,
and threw an innocent playwright in jail, and trembled at the sight
of a Polish Pope. History shows that ultimately, freedom conquers
fear. And given a chance, freedom will conquer fear in every
nation on Earth.
Another objective — objection is that ending tyranny will
unleash chaos. Critics point to the violence in Afghanistan, or
Iraq, or Lebanon as evidence that freedom leaves people less
safe. But look who’s causing the violence. It’s the terrorists, it’s
the extremists. It is no coincidence that they are targeting young
democracies in the Middle East. They know that the success of
free societies there is a mortal threat to their ambitions — and to
their very survival. The fact that our enemies are fighting back is
not a reason to doubt democracy. It is evidence that they recognize
democracy’s power. It is evidence that we are at war. And it is
evidence that free nations must do what it takes to prevail.
Still, some argue that a safer goal would be stability, especially
in the Middle East. The problem is that pursuing stability at the
expense of liberty does not lead to peace — it leads to September
the 11th, 2001. The policy of tolerating tyranny is a moral and
strategic failure. It is a mistake the world must not repeat in the
21st century.
Others fear that democracy will bring dangerous forces to
power, such as Hamas in the Palestinian Territories. Elections
will not always turn out the way we hope. Yet democracy
consists of more than a single trip to the ballot box. Democracy
requires meaningful opposition parties, a vibrant civil society, a
government that enforces the law and responds to the needs of its
people. Elections can accelerate the creation of such institutions. In
a democracy, people will not vote for a life of perpetual violence.
To stay in power, elected officials must listen to their people and
pursue their desires for peace — or, in democracies, the voters will
replace them through free elections.
Finally, there’s the contention that ending tyranny is unrealistic.
Well, some argue that extending democracy around the world is
————
485

simply too difficult to achieve. That’s nothing new. We’ve heard
that criticism before throughout history. At every stage of the
Cold War, there were those who argued that the Berlin Wall was
permanent, and that people behind the Iron Curtain would never
overcome their oppressors. History has sent a different message.
The lesson is that freedom will always have its skeptics. But
that’s not the whole story. There are also people like you, and the
loved ones you represent — men and women with courage to risk
everything for your ideals. In his first address as President, Vaclav
Havel proclaimed, “People, your government has returned to
you!” He was echoing the first speech of Tomas Masaryk — who
was, in turn, quoting the 17th century Czech teacher Comenius.
His message was that freedom is timeless. It does not belong to
one government or one generation. Freedom is the dream and the
right of every person in every nation in every age.
The United States of America believes deeply in that message.
It was the inspiration for our founding, when we declared that “all
men are created equal.” It was the conviction that led us to help
liberate this continent, and stand with the captive nations through
their long struggle. It is the truth that guides our nation to oppose
radicals and extremists and terror and tyranny in the world today.
And it is the reason I have such great confidence in the men and
women in this room.
I leave Prague with a certainty that the cause of freedom is not
tired, and that its future is in the best of hands. With unbreakable
faith in the power of liberty, you will inspire your people, you will
lead your nations, and you will change the world.
Thanks for having me. And may God bless you.

Good evening. In the life of all free nations, there come
moments that decide the direction of a country and reveal the
character of its people. We are now at such a moment.
In Iraq, an ally of the United States is fighting for its survival.
Terrorists and extremists who are at war with us around the world
are seeking to topple Iraq’s government, dominate the region, and
attack us here at home. If Iraq’s young democracy can turn back
these enemies, it will mean a more hopeful Middle East and a more
secure America. This ally has placed its trust in the United States.
And tonight, our moral and strategic imperatives are one: We must
help Iraq defeat those who threaten its future and also threaten
ours.
Eight months ago, we adopted a new strategy to meet that
objective, including a surge in U.S. forces that reached full strength
in June. This week, General David Petraeus and Ambassador
Ryan Crocker testified before Congress about how that strategy
is progressing. In their testimony, these men made clear that our
challenge in Iraq is formidable. Yet they concluded that conditions
in Iraq are improving, that we are seizing the initiative from the
enemy, and that the troop surge is working.
The premise of our strategy is that securing the Iraqi
population is the foundation for all other progress. For Iraqis to
bridge sectarian divides, they need to feel safe in their homes and
neighborhoods. For lasting reconciliation to take root, Iraqis must
feel confident that they do not need sectarian gangs for security.
The goal of the surge is to provide that security and to help prepare
Iraqi forces to maintain it. As I will explain tonight, our success in
meeting these objectives now allows us to begin bringing some of
our troops home.
————
487

Since the surge was announced in January, it has moved
through several phases. First was the flow of additional troops into
Iraq, especially Baghdad and Anbar province. Once these forces
were in place, our commanders launched a series of offensive
operations to drive terrorists and militias out of their strongholds.
And finally, in areas that have been cleared, we are surging
diplomatic and civilian resources to ensure that military progress is
quickly followed up with real improvements in daily life.
Anbar province is a good example of how our strategy is
working. Last year, an intelligence report concluded that Anbar
had been lost to al Qaeda. Some cited this report as evidence
that we had failed in Iraq and should cut our losses and pull out.
Instead, we kept the pressure on the terrorists. The local people
were suffering under the Taliban-like rule of al Qaeda, and they
were sick of it. So they asked us for help.
To take advantage of this opportunity, I sent an additional
4,000 Marines to Anbar as part of the surge. Together, local
sheiks, Iraqi forces, and coalition troops drove the terrorists from
the capital of Ramadi and other population centers. Today, a city
where al Qaeda once planted its flag is beginning to return to
normal. Anbar citizens who once feared beheading for talking to
an American or Iraqi soldier now come forward to tell us where the
terrorists are hiding. Young Sunnis who once joined the insurgency
are now joining the army and police. And with the help of our
provincial reconstruction teams, new jobs are being created and
local governments are meeting again.
These developments do not often make the headlines, but
they do make a difference. During my visit to Anbar on Labor
Day, local Sunni leaders thanked me for America’s support. They
pledged they would never allow al Qaeda to return. And they told
me they now see a place for their people in a democratic Iraq. The
Sunni governor of Anbar province put it this way: “Our tomorrow
starts today.”
The changes in Anbar show all Iraqis what becomes possible
when extremists are driven out. They show al Qaeda that it cannot
————
488

count on popular support, even in a province its leaders once
declared their home base. And they show the world that ordinary
people in the Middle East want the same things for their children
that we want for ours — a decent life and a peaceful future.
In Anbar, the enemy remains active and deadly. Earlier today,
one of the brave tribal sheikhs who helped lead the revolt against
al Qaeda was murdered. In response, a fellow Sunni leader
declared: “We are determined to strike back and continue our
work.” And as they do, they can count on the continued support of
the United States.
Throughout Iraq, too many citizens are being killed by
terrorists and death squads. And for most Iraqis, the quality of
life is far from where it should be. Yet General Petraeus and
Ambassador Crocker report that the success in Anbar is beginning
to be replicated in other parts of the country.
One year ago, much of Baghdad was under siege. Schools
were closed, markets were shuttered, and sectarian violence was
spiraling out of control. Today, most of Baghdad’s neighborhoods
are being patrolled by coalition and Iraqi forces who live among
the people they protect. Many schools and markets are reopening.
Citizens are coming forward with vital intelligence. Sectarian
killings are down. And ordinary life is beginning to return.
One year ago, much of Diyala province was a sanctuary for al
Qaeda and other extremist groups, and its capital of Baqubah was
emerging as an al Qaeda stronghold. Today, Baqubah is cleared.
Diyala province is the site of a growing popular uprising against
the extremists. And some local tribes are working alongside
coalition and Iraqi forces to clear out the enemy and reclaim their
communities.
One year ago, Shia extremists and Iranian-backed militants
were gaining strength and targeting Sunnis for assassination.
Today, these groups are being broken up, and many of their leaders
are being captured or killed.
These gains are a tribute to our military, they are a tribute to the
courage of the Iraqi security forces, and they are the tribute to an
————
489

Iraqi government that has decided to take on the extremists.
Now the Iraqi government must bring the same determination
to achieving reconciliation. This is an enormous undertaking after
more than three decades of tyranny and division. The government
has not met its own legislative benchmarks — and in my meetings
with Iraqi leaders, I have made it clear that they must.
Yet Iraq’s national leaders are getting some things done.
For example, they have passed a budget. They’re sharing oil
revenues with the provinces. They’re allowing former Baathists
to rejoin Iraq’s military or receive government pensions. Local
reconciliation is taking place. The key now is to link this progress
in the provinces to progress in Baghdad. As local politics change,
so will national politics.
Our troops in Iraq are performing brilliantly. Along with Iraqi
forces, they have captured or killed an average of more than 1,500
enemy fighters per month since January. Yet ultimately, the way
forward depends on the ability of Iraqis to maintain security gains.
According to General Petraeus and a panel chaired by retired
General Jim Jones, the Iraqi army is becoming more capable —
although there is still a great deal of work to be done to improve
the national police. Iraqi forces are receiving increased cooperation
from local populations. And this is improving their ability to hold
areas that have been cleared.
Because of this success, General Petraeus believes we have
now reached the point where we can maintain our security gains
with fewer American forces. He has recommended that we not
replace about 2,200 Marines scheduled to leave Anbar province
later this month. In addition, he says it will soon be possible to
bring home an Army combat brigade, for a total force reduction of
5,700 troops by Christmas. And he expects that by July, we will be
able to reduce our troop levels in Iraq from 20 combat brigades to
15.
General Petraeus also recommends that in December we begin
transitioning to the next phase of our strategy in Iraq. As terrorists
are defeated, civil society takes root, and the Iraqis assume more
————
490

control over their own security, our mission in Iraq will evolve.
Over time, our troops will shift from leading operations, to
partnering with Iraqi forces, and eventually to overwatching those
forces. As this transition in our mission takes place, our troops will
focus on a more limited set of tasks, including counterterrorism
operations and training, equipping, and supporting Iraqi forces.
I have consulted with the Joint Chiefs of Staff, other members
of my national security team, Iraqi officials, and leaders of both
parties in Congress. I have benefited from their advice, and I have
accepted General Petraeus’s recommendations. I have directed
General Petraeus and Ambassador Crocker to update their joint
campaign plan for Iraq, so we can adjust our military and civilian
resources accordingly. I have also directed them to deliver another
report to Congress in March. At that time, they will provide a
fresh assessment of the situation in Iraq and of the troop levels and
resources we need to meet our national security objectives.
The principle guiding my decisions on troop levels in Iraq
is “return on success.” The more successful we are, the more
American troops can return home. And in all we do, I will ensure
that our commanders on the ground have the troops and flexibility
they need to defeat the enemy.
Americans want our country to be safe and our troops to begin
coming home from Iraq. Yet those of us who believe success in
Iraq is essential to our security, and those who believe we should
begin bringing our troops home, have been at odds. Now, because
of the measure of success we are seeing in Iraq, we can begin
seeing troops come home. The way forward I have described
tonight makes it possible, for the first time in years, for people
who have been on opposite sides of this difficult debate to come
together.
This vision for a reduced American presence also has the
support of Iraqi leaders from all communities. At the same time,
they understand that their success will require U.S. political,
economic, and security engagement that extends beyond my
presidency. These Iraqi leaders have asked for an enduring
————
491

relationship with America. And we are ready to begin building that
relationship — in a way that protects our interests in the region and
requires many fewer American troops.
The success of a free Iraq is critical to the security of the
United States. A free Iraq will deny al Qaeda a safe haven. A free
Iraq will counter the destructive ambitions of Iran. A free Iraq will
marginalize extremists, unleash the talent of its people, and be an
anchor of stability in the region. A free Iraq will set an example for
people across the Middle East. A free Iraq will be our partner in the
fight against terror — and that will make us safer here at home.
Realizing this vision will be difficult, but it is achievable.
Our military commanders believe we can succeed. Our diplomats
believe we can succeed. And for the safety of future generations of
Americans, we must succeed.
If we were to be driven out of Iraq, extremists of all strains
would be emboldened. Al Qaeda could gain new recruits and
new sanctuaries. Iran would benefit from the chaos and would be
encouraged in its efforts to gain nuclear weapons and dominate the
region. Extremists could control a key part of the global energy
supply. Iraq could face a humanitarian nightmare. Democracy
movements would be violently reversed. We would leave our
children to face a far more dangerous world. And as we saw on
September the 11th, 2001, those dangers can reach our cities and
kill our people.
Whatever political party you belong to, whatever your position
on Iraq, we should be able to agree that America has a vital interest
in preventing chaos and providing hope in the Middle East. We
should be able to agree that we must defeat al Qaeda, counter Iran,
help the Afghan government, work for peace in the Holy Land, and
strengthen our military so we can prevail in the struggle against
terrorists and extremists.
So tonight I want to speak to members of the United States
Congress: Let us come together on a policy of strength in the
Middle East. I thank you for providing crucial funds and resources
for our military. And I ask you to join me in supporting the
————
492

recommendations General Petraeus has made and the troop levels
he has asked for.
To the Iraqi people: You have voted for freedom, and now you
are liberating your country from terrorists and death squads. You
must demand that your leaders make the tough choices needed to
achieve reconciliation. As you do, have confidence that America
does not abandon our friends, and we will not abandon you.
To Iraq’s neighbors who seek peace: The violent extremists
who target Iraq are also targeting you. The best way to secure your
interests and protect your own people is to stand with the people of
Iraq. That means using your economic and diplomatic leverage to
strengthen the government in Baghdad. And it means the efforts by
Iran and Syria to undermine that government must end.
To the international community: The success of a free Iraq
matters to every civilized nation. We thank the 36 nations who
have troops on the ground in Iraq and the many others who are
helping that young democracy. We encourage all nations to help,
by implementing the International Compact to revitalize Iraq’s
economy, by participating in the Neighbors Conferences to boost
cooperation and overcome differences in the region, and by
supporting the new and expanded mission of the United Nations in
Iraq.
To our military personnel, intelligence officers, diplomats,
and civilians on the front lines in Iraq: You have done everything
America has asked of you. And the progress I have reported tonight
is in large part because of your courage and hard effort. You are
serving far from home. Our nation is grateful for your sacrifices,
and the sacrifices of your families.
Earlier this year, I received an email from the family of Army
Specialist Brandon Stout of Michigan. Brandon volunteered for
the National Guard and was killed while serving in Baghdad. His
family has suffered greatly. Yet in their sorrow, they see larger
purpose. His wife, Audrey, says that Brandon felt called to serve
and knew what he was fighting for. And his parents, Tracy and
Jeff, wrote me this: “We believe this is a war of good and evil and
————
493

we must win even if it cost the life of our own son. Freedom is not
free.”
This country is blessed to have Americans like Brandon Stout,
who make extraordinary sacrifices to keep us safe from harm. They
are doing so in a fight that is just, and right, and necessary. And now
it falls to us to finish the work they have begun.
Some say the gains we are making in Iraq come too late. They
are mistaken. It is never too late to deal a blow to al Qaeda. It is
never too late to advance freedom. And it is never too late to support
our troops in a fight they can win.
Good night, and God bless America.

Good morning. Thank you. Welcome to the State Department.
I’m honored to address this historic meeting on energy security and
climate change. And I appreciate you all being here.
Energy security and climate change are two of the great
challenges of our time. The United States takes these challenges
seriously. The world’s response will help shape the future of the
global economy and the condition of our environment for future
generations. The nations in this room have special responsibilities.
We represent the world’s major economies, we are major users of
energy, and we have the resources and knowledge base to develop
clean energy technologies.
Our guiding principle is clear: We must lead the world to
produce fewer greenhouse gas emissions, and we must do it in a
way that does not undermine economic growth or prevent nations
from delivering greater prosperity for their people. We know this
can be done. Last year America grew our economy while also
reducing greenhouse gases. Several other nations have made similar
strides.
This progress points us in the right direction, but we’ve got
to do more. So before this year’s G8 summit, I announced that
the United States will work with other nations to establish a new
international approach to energy security and climate change.
Today’s meeting is an important step in this process. With the work
we begin today, we can agree on a new approach that will reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, strengthen energy security, encourage
economic growth and sustainable development, and advance
negotiations under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change.
I thank the State Department for hosting this event. I
————
495

appreciate members of my Cabinet who have joined us today. I
thank Jim Connaughton, who is the Chairman of the Council on
Environmental Quality, for being here. I appreciate you being the
personal representative of this, and I hope you’re doing — I hope
you think he’s doing a fine job.
I welcome Minister Rachmat, the Minister of Environment
of Indonesia, who is the Chairman of the upcoming U.N. climate
meeting in December. I welcome Mr. de Boer, who is the
Executive Secretary of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change. I welcome all the ministers and delegates who
are here. We really appreciate you coming. I thank the ambassadors
for joining this august group. I thank members of the Congress
who have taken time to come by: Congressman Ed Markey of
Massachusetts and Congressman Bart Gordon of Tennessee. I
appreciate you taking time to come by and participate in these
meetings.
Every day energy brings countless benefits to our people.
Energy powers new hospitals and schools so we can live longer
and more productive lives. Energy transforms the way we produce
food, so we can feed our growing populations. Energy enables
us to travel and communicate across great distances, so we can
expand trade and prosperity. Energy sustains the world’s most
advanced economies, which makes it possible for us to devote
resources to fighting hunger and disease and poverty around the
globe.
In this new century, the need for energy will only grow. Much
of this increased demand will come from the developing world,
where nations will need more energy to build critical infrastructure
and grow their economies, improve the lives of their people.
Overall, the demand for energy is expected to rise by more than 50
percent by 2030.
This growing demand for energy is a sign of a vibrant, global
economy. Yet it also possesses — poses serious challenges, and
one of them, of course, is energy security. Right now much of the
world’s energy comes from oil, and much of the oil comes from
————
496

unstable regions and rogue states. This dependence leaves the
global economy vulnerable to supply shocks and shortages and
manipulation, and to extremists and terrorists who could cause
great disruptions of oil shipments.
Another challenge is climate change. Our understanding of
climate change has come a long way. A report issued earlier this
year by the U.N. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
concluded both that global temperatures are rising and that this
is caused largely by human activities. When we burn fossil
fuels we release greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, and the
concentration of greenhouse gases has increased substantially.
For many years those who worried about climate change and
those who worried about energy security were on opposite ends of
the debate. It was said that we faced a choice between protecting
the environment and producing enough energy. Today we know
better. These challenges share a common solution: technology.
By developing new low-emission technologies, we can meet
the growing demand for energy and at the same time reduce air
pollution and greenhouse gas emissions. As a result, our nations
have an opportunity to leave the debates of the past behind, and
reach a consensus on the way forward. And that’s our purpose
today.
No one country has all the answers, including mine. The best
way to tackle this problem is to think creatively and to learn from
other’s experiences and to come together on a way to achieve the
objectives we share. Together, our nations will pave the way for a
new international approach on greenhouse gas emissions.
This new approach must involve all the world’s largest
producers of greenhouse gas emissions, including developed and
developing nations. We will set a long-term goal for reducing
global greenhouse gas emissions. By setting this goal, we
acknowledge there is a problem. And by setting this goal, we
commit ourselves to doing something about it.
By next summer, we will convene a meeting of heads of state
to finalize the goal and other elements of this approach, including
————
497

a strong and transparent system for measuring our progress toward
meeting the goal we set. This will require concerted effort by all
our nations. Only by doing the necessary work this year will it be
possible to reach a global consensus at the U.N. in 2009.
Each nation will design its own separate strategies for making
progress toward achieving this long-term goal. These strategies
will reflect each country’s different energy resources, different
stages of development, and different economic needs.
There are many policy tools that nations can use, including a
variety of market mechanisms, to create incentives for companies
and consumers to invest in new low-emission energy sources. We
will also form working groups with leaders of different sectors of
our economies, which will discuss ways of sharing technology and
best practices.
Each nation must decide for itself the right mix of tools
and technologies to achieve results that are measurable and
environmentally effective. While our strategies may be
differentiated, we share a common responsibility to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions while keeping our economies growing.
The key to this effort will be the advance of clean energy
technologies. Since I became President, the United States
government has invested nearly $18 billion to research, develop
and promote clean and efficient energy technologies. The
private sector here in our country has responded with significant
investments, ranging from corporate research and development to
venture capital. Our investments in research and technology are
bringing the world closer to a remarkable breakthrough — an age
of clean energy where we can power our growing economies and
improve the lives of our people and be responsible stewards of the
earth the Almighty trusted to our care.
The age of clean energy requires transforming the way we
produce electricity. Electric power plants that burn coal are the
world’s leading cause of greenhouse gas emissions. The world’s
supply of coal is secure and abundant. And our challenge is
take advantage of it while maintaining our commitment to the
————
498

environment. One promising solution is advanced clean coal
technology. The future of this technology will allow us to trap and
store carbon emissions and air pollutants produced by burning coal.
Since 2001 the United States has invested more than $2.5 billion
to research and develop clean coal. And in partnership with other
nations and the private sector we’re moving closer to a historic
achievement — producing energy from the world’s first zeroemissions coal-fired plant.
We also need to take advantage of clean safe nuclear power.
Nuclear power is the one existing source of energy that can
generate massive amounts of electricity without causing any air
pollution or greenhouse gas emissions. Without the world’s 439
nuclear power plants, there would be nearly 2 billion additional
tons of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere each year. And by
expanding the use of nuclear power, we can reduce greenhouse gas
emissions even more.
The United States is working to reduce barriers to new nuclear
power plants in our country without compromising safety. Just last
week, a company applied for approval to build the first new nuclear
reactor in my country since the since the 1970s. As we build new
reactors here in the United States, we’re also working to bring the
benefits of nuclear energy to other countries.
My administration established a new initiative called the
Global Nuclear Energy Partnership. This partnership will work
with nations with advanced civilian nuclear energy programs, such
as France and Japan and China and Russia. Together we will help
developing nations obtain secure, cost-effective and proliferationresistant nuclear power, so they can have a reliable source of zeroemissions energy.
We’ll also need to expand our use of two other promising
sources of zero-emissions energy, and that’s wind and solar power.
Wind power is becoming cost-effective in many parts of America.
We’ve increased wind energy production by more than 300 percent.
We also launched the Solar America Initiative to lower the cost
of solar power, so we can make — help make this technology
————
499

competitive, as well. Taken together, low-carbon technologies like
wind and solar power have the potential to one day provide up to
20 percent of America’s electricity.
The age of clean energy also requires transforming the way we
fuel our cars and trucks. Almost all our vehicles run on gasoline
or diesel fuel. This means we produce greenhouse gas emissions
whenever we get behind the wheel. Transportation accounts for
about 20 percent of the world’s greenhouse gas emissions every
year. To reduce these emissions we must reduce our dependence
on oil. So America is investing in new, clean alternatives. We’re
investing millions of dollars to develop the next generation of
sustainable biofuels like cellulosic ethanol, which means we’ll
use everything from wood chips to grasses to agricultural waste to
make ethanol.
We’re offering tax credits to encourage Americans to drive
fuel-efficient hybrid vehicles. We’re working to develop nextgeneration plug-in hybrids that will be able to travel nearly 40
miles without using a drop of gasoline. And your automobile
doesn’t have to look like a golf cart.
We’re on track to meet our pledge of investing $1.2 billion
to develop advanced hydrogen-powered vehicles that emit pure
water instead of exhaust fumes. We’re also taking steps to make
sure these technologies reach the market. We’ve asked Congress to
set a new mandatory — I repeat, mandatory — fuel standard that
requires 35 billion gallons of renewable and other alternative fuels
in 2017, and to reform fuel economy standards for cars the same
way we did for light trucks. Together these two steps will help us
cut America’s consumption of gasoline by 20 percent in 10 years.
It’s an initiative I’ve called 20-in-10. Ushering in the age of clean
energy is an historic undertaking. We take it seriously here in the
United States. Achieving this vision will require major investment
in innovation by all our nations. Today the United States and
Japan fund most of the research and development for clean energy
technologies. Meeting the objectives we share and the goal we’re
going to set will require all the nations in this hall to increase their
————
500

clean energy research and development investments.
We must also work to make these technologies more
widely available, especially in the developing world. So today I
propose that we join together to create a new international clean
technology fund. This fund will be supported by contributions
from governments from around the world, and it will help finance
clean energy projects in the developing world. I’ve asked Treasury
Secretary Hank Paulson to coordinate this effort, and he plans to
begin exploratory discussions with your countries over the next
several months.
At the same time, we also must promote global free trade
in energy technology. The most immediate and effective action
we can take is to eliminate tariff and non-tariff barriers on clean
energy goods and services.
As we work to transform the way we produce energy, we
must also address another major factor in climate change, which
is deforestation. The world’s forests help reduce the amount of
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere by storing carbon dioxide.
But when our forests disappear, the concentration of greenhouse
gas levels rise in the atmosphere. Scientists estimate that nearly
20 percent of the world’s greenhouse gas admissions [sic] are
attributable to deforestation.
We’re partnering with other nations to promote forest
conservation and management across the world. We welcome
new commitments from Australia, Brazil, with China and
Indonesia. The United States remains committed to initiatives
such as the Congo Basin Forest Partnership and the Asian Forest
Partnership. We will continue our efforts through the Tropical
Forest Conservation Act, which helps developing nations redirect
debt payments toward forest conservation programs. So far my
administration has concluded 12 agreements, concluding [sic] up
to 50 million acres of forest lands.
America’s efforts also include an $87-million initiative to help
developing nations stop illegal logging. These efforts will help
developing nations save their forests, and combat a major source of
————
501

greenhouse gas emissions.
The United States is also taking steps to protect forests in
our own country. It’s one thing to help others; we got to make
sure we do a good job here at home — and we are. Since 2001,
we’ve provided more than $3 billion to restore our forests and
protect them against catastrophic fires as part of a Healthy Forest
Initiative. In partnership with our farmers and ranchers, we’re
providing tens of billions of dollars in incentives for conservation.
We’re promoting sustainable public and private land-management
policies. By taking these steps, we’ve helped increase the amount
of carbon storage in our forests, and we’ve helped safeguard a
national treasure for generations to come.
What I’m telling you is, is that we’ve got a strategy; we’ve
got a comprehensive approach. And we look forward to working
with our Congress to make sure that comprehensive approach is
effective. And we look forward to working with you as a part of
this global effort to do our duty.
And we’ve done this kind of work before. And we have
confidence in the success of our efforts. Twenty years ago nations
finalized an agreement called the Montreal Protocol to phaseout substances that were depleting the ozone layer. Since then,
we have made great strides to repair the damage. Just last week,
developed and developing nations reached consensus on speeding
up the recovery of the ozone layer by accelerating the phase-out
of these harmful substances. This accelerated phase out will bring
larger benefits because they’ll dramatically reduce greenhouse gas
emissions.
We have seen what happens when we come together to work
for a common cause, and we can do it again. And that’s what
I’m here to urge you. The United States will do our part. We take
this issue seriously. And we look forward to bringing a spirit
of cooperation and commitment to our efforts to confront the
challenges of energy security and climate change. By working
together, we will set wise and effective policies. That’s what I’m
interested in, effective policies. I want to get the job done. We’ve
————
502

identified a problem, let’s go solve it together.
We will harness the power of technology. There is a way
forward that will enable us to grow our economies and protect the
environment, and that’s called technology. We’ll meet our energy
needs. We’ll be good stewards of this environment. Achieving
these goals will require a sustained effort over many decades. This
problem isn’t going to be solved overnight. Yet years from now
our children are going to look back at the choices we make today,
at this deciding moment: It will be a moment when we choose
to expand prosperity instead of accepting stagnation; it will be a
moment when we turn the tide against greenhouse gas emissions
instead of allowing the problem to grow; it will be a moment when
we rejected the predictions of despair and set a course of a more
hopeful future.
The moment is now, and I appreciate you attending this
meeting. And we look forward to working with you. May God
bless you all.


Thank you very much. Gracias. Buenos Dias. I am pleased
to be back at the State Department. I appreciate the work that’s
done here. Every day the men and women of this department serve
as America’s emissaries to the world. Every day you help our
country respond to aggressors and bring peace to troubled lands.
Every day you advance our country’s mission in support of basic
human rights to the millions who are denied them. Secretary Rice
constantly tells me about the good work being done here at the
State Department, and on behalf of a grateful nation, I thank you
for your hard work and I’m pleased to be with you.
Few issues have challenged this department — and our
nation — longer than the situation in Cuba. Nearly half a century
has passed since Cuba’s regime ordered American diplomats to
evacuate our embassy in Havana. This was the decisive break
of our diplomatic relations with the island, a troubling signal for
the future of the Cuban people, and the dawn of an unhappy era
between our two countries. In this building, President John F.
Kennedy spoke about the U.S. economic embargo against Cuba’s
dictatorship. And it was here where he announced the end of the
missile crisis that almost plunged the world into nuclear war.
Today, another President comes with hope to discuss a new
era for the United States and Cuba. The day is coming when the
Cuban people will chart their own course for a better life. The day
is coming when the Cuban people have the freedom they have
awaited for so long.
Madam Secretary, thank you for your introduction. I’m
pleased to be with you and Ambassador Negroponte and all who
work here. Thanks for the hospitality. I’m pleased to be here with
our Secretary of Commerce, Secretary Carlos Gutierrez — born
————
505

in Cuba. I appreciate other members of my administration who are
here.
I particularly want to thank the members of Congress
who have joined us: Senator Mel Martinez, born in Cuba;
Congresswoman Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, born in Cuba; Lincoln DiazBalart, born in Cuba; su hermanito, Mario Diaz-Balart. I want
to thank Chris Smith for joining us, Congressman from Jersey;
Thaddeus McCotter, Michigan; Debbie Wasserman Schultz, from
Florida; as well as Tim Mahone from Florida. Appreciate you
being here.
I thank the members of the Diplomatic Corps who have joined
us. I appreciate the Ambassadors to the Organization of American
States who are with us. I particularly want to thank the Cuban
families who have joined me on the stage.
One of the great success stories of the past century is the
advance of economic and political freedom across Latin America.
In this room are officials representing nations that are embracing
the blessings of democratic government and free enterprise. And
the United States is proud and active to work with you in your
transformations.
One country in our region still isolates its people from the
hope that freedom brings, and traps them in a system that has
failed them. Forty-eight years ago, in the early moments of Cuba’s
revolution, its leaders offered a prediction. He said — and I quote
— “The worst enemies which the Cuban revolution can face are
the revolutionaries themselves.” One of history’s great tragedies is
that he made that dark prophecy come true.
Cuba’s rulers promised individual liberty. Instead they denied
their citizens basic rights that the free world takes for granted. In
Cuba it is illegal to change jobs, to change houses, to travel abroad,
and to read books or magazines without the express approval of
the state. It is against the law for more than three Cubans to meet
without permission. Neighborhood Watch programs do not look
out for criminals. Instead, they monitor their fellow citizens —
keeping track of neighbors’ comings and goings, who visits them,
————
506

and what radio stations they listen to. The sense of community and
the simple trust between human beings is gone.
Cuba’s rulers promised an era of economic advancement.
Instead they brought generations of economic misery. Many of
the cars on the street pre-date the revolution — and some Cubans
rely on horse carts for transportation. Housing for many ordinary
Cubans is in very poor condition, while the ruling class lives
in mansions. Clinics for ordinary Cubans suffer from chronic
shortages in medicine and equipment. Many Cubans are forced to
turn to the black market to feed their families. There are long lines
for basic necessities — reminiscent of the Soviet bread lines of the
last century. Meanwhile, the regime offers fully stocked food stores
to foreign tourists, diplomats and businessmen in communism’s
version of apartheid.
Cuba’s rulers promised freedom of the press. Instead they
closed down private newspapers and radio and television stations.
They’ve jailed and beaten journalists, raided their homes, and
seized their paper, ink and fax machines. One Cuban journalist
asked foreigners who visited him for one thing: a pen. Another uses
shoe polish as ink as a typewriter ribbon.
Cuba’s rulers promised, “absolute respect for human rights.”
Instead they offered Cubans rat-infested prisons and a police state.
Hundreds are serving long prison sentences for political offenses
such as the crime of “dangerousness” — as defined by the regime.
Others have been jailed for the crime of “peaceful sedition” —
which means whatever Cuban authorities decide it means.
Joining us here are family members of political prisoners in
Cuba. I’ve asked them to come because I want our fellow citizens
to see the faces of those who suffer as a result of the human rights
abuses on the island some 90 miles from our shore. One of them is
Olga Alonso. Her brother, Ricardo Gonzalez Alonso [sic], has been
harassed by Cuban authorities since he was 11 years old, because
he wrote things that the Cuban authorities did not like. In 2003,
Ricardo was arrested for his writings and sentenced to 20 years in
prison. The authorities seized illegal contraband they found in his
————
507

home. These included such things as a laptop computer, notebooks
and a printer. Olga, we’re glad you’re here. Thank you for coming.
Marlenis Gonzalez and her daughter, Melissa, are here. They
recently arrived from Cuba, but without Melissa’s father. Jorge
Luis Gonzalez Tanquero dared to defend the human rights of
his countrymen. For that, he was arrested for crimes against the
state. Now he languishes in poor health inside a Cuban prison.
Bienvenidos.
Damaris Garcia y su tia, Mirta Pernet, are with us today.
Damaris calls the Cuban government “a killing machine” — those
are her words. They’ve seen relatives imprisoned for supporting
liberty. One beloved family member, Omar Pernet Hernandez,
was a poor man who sold candy on the streets of Havana. For
advocating freedom, he is serving a sentence of 25 years. He’s 62
years old, he’s emaciated. Yet he remains a determined advocate
for human rights for the Cuban people. Bienvenidos.
Also with us is Yamile Llanes Labrada. Yamile’s husband,
Jorge [sic] Luis Garcia Paneque, was a surgeon and journalist.
He was sentenced to 24 years in prison for daring speak the truth
about the regime. Yamile herself was accused of espionage and
she feared for the safety of her four children. After Jos ‘s arrest,
a mob organized by state authorities surrounded their house. The
mob carried sticks and threatened to set fire to the house with the
family inside. Earlier this year, Yamile and her children made it off
the island. They do not know when they’ll see their father again.
Bienvenidos, Yamile.
I want to thank each of you [for] coming today. I thank you for
allowing me to share your stories, and I thank you for your
courage. I ask that God watch over you and your loved ones. Que
Dios les bendiga a ustedes y a sus familias. And I join your prayers
for a day when the light of liberty will shine on Cuba.
These are just a few of the examples of the terror and trauma
that is Cuba today. The socialist paradise is a tropical gulag. The
quest for justice that once inspired the Cuban people has now
become a grab for power. And as with all totalitarian systems,
————
508

Cuba’s regime no doubt has other horrors still unknown to the
rest of the world. Once revealed, they will shock the conscience
of humanity. And they will shame the regime’s defenders and
all those democracies that have been silent. One former Cuban
political prisoner, Armando Valladares, puts it this way: It will be a
time when “mankind will feel the revulsion it felt when the crimes
of Stalin were brought to light.” And that time is coming.
As we speak, calls for fundamental change are growing across
the island. Peaceful demonstrations are spreading. Earlier this year
leading Cuban dissidents came together for the first time to issue
the Unity of Freedom — a declaration for democratic change.
They hear the dying gasps of a failed regime. They know that even
history’s cruelest nightmares cannot last forever. A restive people
who long to rejoin the world at last have hope. And they will bring
to Cuba a real revolution — a revolution of freedom, democracy
and justice.
Now is the time to support the democratic movements
growing on the island. Now is the time to stand with the Cuban
people as they stand up for their liberty. And now is the time for
the world to put aside its differences and prepare for Cuban’s
transition to a future of freedom and progress and promise. The
dissidents of today will be the nation’s leaders tomorrow — and
when freedom finally comes, they will surely remember who stood
with them.
The Czech Republic and Hungary and Poland have been vital
sources of support and encouragement to Cuba’s brave democratic
opposition. I ask other countries to follow suit. All nations can
make tangible efforts to show public support for those who love
freedom on the island. They can open up their embassies in
Havana to pro-democracy leaders and invite them to different
events. They can use their lobbies of the embassies to give Cubans
access to the Internet and to books and to magazines. They can
encourage their country’s non-governmental organizations to reach
out directly to Cuba’s independent civil society.
Here at home we can do more, as well. The United States
————
509

Congress has recently voted for additional funding to support
Cuban democracy efforts. I thank you all for your good work on
this measure — and I urge you to get the bill to my desk as soon
as we possibly can. I also urge our Congress to show our support
and solidarity for fundamental change in Cuba by maintaining our
embargo on the dictatorship until it changes.
Cuba’s regime uses the U.S. embargo as a scapegoat for
Cuba’s miseries. Yet Presidents of both our political parties
have long understood that the source of Cuba’s suffering is not
the embargo, but the communist system. They know that trade
with the Cuban government would not help the Cuban people
until there are major changes to Cuba’s political and economic
system. Instead, trade with Cuba would merely enrich the elites in
power and strengthen their grip. As long as the regime maintains
its monopoly over the political and economic life of the Cuban
people, the United States will keep the embargo in place.
The United States knows how much the Cuban people
are suffering — and we have not stood idle. Over the years,
we’ve granted asylum to hundreds of thousands who have
fled the repression and misery imposed by the regime. We’ve
rallied nations to take up the banner of Cuban liberty. And we
will continue to do so. We’ve authorized private citizens and
organizations to provide food, and medicine, and other aid
— amounting to more than $270 million last year alone. The
American people, the people of this generous land, are the largest
providers of humanitarian aid to the Cuban people in the entire
world.
The aid we provide goes directly into the hands of the Cuban
people, rather than into the coffers of the Cuban leaders. And that’s
really the heart of our policy: to break the absolute control that the
regime holds over the material resources that the Cuban people
need to live and to prosper and to have hope.
To further that effort, the United States is prepared to take new
measures right now to help the Cuban people directly — but only
if the Cuban regime, the ruling class, gets out of the way.
————
510

For example — here’s an interesting idea to help the Cuban
people — the United States government is prepared to license
non-governmental organizations and faith-based groups to provide
computers and Internet access to Cuban people — if Cuba’s rulers
will end their restrictions on Internet access for all the people.
Or the United States is prepared to invite Cuban young people
whose families suffer oppression into the Partnership for Latin
American Youth scholarship programs, to help them have equal
access to greater educational opportunities — if the Cuban rulers
will allow them to freely participate.
We make these offers to the people of Cuba — and we hope
their rulers will allow them to accept. You know, we’ve made
similar offers before — but they’ve been rejected out of hand by
the regime. It’s a sad lesson, and it should be a vivid lesson for all:
For Cuba’s ruling class, its grip on power is more important than
the welfare of its people.
Life will not improve for Cubans under their current system
of government. It will not improve by exchanging one dictator for
another. It will not improve if we seek accommodation with a new
tyranny in the interests of “stability.” America will have no part in
giving oxygen to a criminal regime victimizing its own people. We
will not support the old way with new faces, the old system held
together by new chains. The operative word in our future dealings
with Cuba is not “stability.” The operative word is “freedom.”
In that spirit, today I also am announcing a new initiative
to develop an international multi-billion dollar Freedom Fund
for Cuba. This fund would help the Cuban people rebuild their
economy and make the transition to democracy. I have asked two
members of my Cabinet to lead the effort — Secretary Rice and
Secretary Gutierrez. They will enlist foreign governments and
international organizations to contribute to this initiative.
And here’s how the fund will work: The Cuban government
must demonstrate that it has adopted, in word and deed,
fundamental freedoms. These include the freedom of speech,
freedom of association, freedom of press, freedom to form
————
511

political parties, and the freedom to change the government
through periodic, multi-party elections. And once these freedoms
are in place, the fund will be able to give Cubans — especially
Cuban entrepreneurs — access to grants, and loans and debt relief
to help rebuild their country.
The restoration of these basic freedoms is the foundation of
fair, free and competitive elections. Without these fundamental
protections in place, elections are only cynical exercises that give
dictatorships a legitimacy they do not deserve.
We will know there is a new Cuba when opposition parties
have the freedom to organize, assemble and speak with equal
access to the airwaves. We will know there is a new Cuba when
a free and independent press has the power to operate without
censors. We will know there is a new Cuba when the Cuban
government removes its stranglehold on private economic activity.
And above all, we will know there is a new Cuba when
authorities go to the prisons, walk to the cells where people are
being held for their beliefs and set them free. It will be a time
when the families here are reunited with their loved ones, and
when the names of free people — including dissidents such as
Oscar Elias Biscet, Normando Hernandez Gonzales, and Omar
Rodriguez Saludes are free. It will be a moment when Cubans of
conscience are released from their shackles — not as a gesture or a
tactic, but because the government no longer puts people in prison
because of what they think, or what they say or what they believe.
Cuba’s transition from a shattered society to a free country
may be long and difficult. Things will not always go as hoped.
There will be difficult adjustments to make. One of the curses
of totalitarianism is that it affects everyone. Good people make
moral compromises to feed their families, avoid the whispers of
neighbors, and escape a visit from the secret police. If Cuba is to
enter a new era, it must find a way to reconcile and forgive those
who have been part of the system but who do not have blood on
their hands. They’re victims as well.
At this moment, my words are being transmitted into — live
————
512

into Cuba by media outlets in the free world — including Radio
and TV Marti. To those Cubans who are listening — perhaps at
great risk — I would like to speak to you directly.
Some of you are members of the Cuban military, or the police,
or officials in the government. You may have once believed in
the revolution. Now you can see its failure. When Cubans rise up
to demand their liberty, they — they — the liberty they deserve,
you’ve got to make a choice. Will you defend a disgraced and
dying order by using force against your own people? Or will you
embrace your people’s desire for change? There is a place for you
in the free Cuba. You can share the hope found in the song that has
become a rallying cry for freedom-loving Cubans on and off the
island: “Nuestro Dia Ya Viene Llegando.” Our day is coming soon.
To the ordinary Cubans who are listening: You have the power
to shape your own destiny. You can bring about a future where
your leaders answer to you, where you can freely express your
beliefs and where your children can grow up in peace. Many
experts once said that that day could never come to Eastern
Europe, or Spain or Chile. Those experts were wrong. When
the Holy Father came to Cuba and offered God’s blessings, he
reminded you that you hold your country’s future in your hands.
And you can carry this refrain in your heart: Su dia ya viene
llegando. Your day is coming soon.
To the schoolchildren of Cuba: You have a lot in common
with young people in the United States. You both dream of hopeful
futures, and you both have the optimism to make those dreams
come true. Do not believe the tired lies you are told about America.
We want nothing from you except to welcome you to the hope and
joy of freedom. Do not fear the future. Su dia ya viene llegando.
Your day is coming soon.
Until that day, you and your suffering are never far from our
hearts and prayers. The American people care about you. And until
we stand together as free men and women, I leave you with a hope,
a dream, and a mission: Viva Cuba Libre.

Thank you for coming. Prime Minister Olmert, President
Abbas, Secretary General Ban, former Prime Minister Blair,
distinguished guests: Welcome to one of the finest institutes we
have in America, the United States Naval Academy. We appreciate
you joining us in what I believe is an historic opportunity to
encourage the expansion of freedom and peace in the Holy Land.
We meet to lay the foundation for the establishment of a new
nation — a democratic Palestinian state that will live side by side
with Israel in peace and security. We meet to help bring an end to
the violence that has been the true enemy of the aspirations of both
the Israelis and Palestinians.
We’re off to a strong start. I’m about to read a statement that
was agreed upon by our distinguished guests:
The representatives of the government of the state of Israel
and the Palestinian Liberation Organization, represented respective
by Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, and President Mahmoud Abbas
in his capacity as Chairman of the PLO Executive Committee and
President of the Palestinian Authority, have convened in Annapolis,
Maryland, under the auspices of President George W. Bush of the
United States of America, and with the support of the participants
of this international conference, having concluded the following
joint understanding.
We express our determination to bring an end to bloodshed,
suffering and decades of conflict between our peoples; to usher in
a new era of peace, based on freedom, security, justice, dignity,
respect and mutual recognition; to propagate a culture of peace
and nonviolence; to confront terrorism and incitement, whether
committed by Palestinians or Israelis. In furtherance of the goal
of two states, Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and
————
515

security, we agree to immediately launch good-faith bilateral
negotiations in order to conclude a peace treaty, resolving all
outstanding issues, including all core issues, without exception, as
specified in previous agreements.
We agree to engage in vigorous, ongoing and continuous
negotiations, and shall make every effort to conclude an agreement
before the end of 2008. For this purpose, a steering committee,
led jointly by the head of the delegation of each party, will meet
continuously, as agreed. The steering committee will develop a
joint work plan and establish and oversee the work of negotiations
teams to address all issues, to be headed by one lead representative
from each party. The first session of the steering committee will be
held on 12 December 2007.
President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert will continue to
meet on a bi-weekly basis to follow up the negotiations in order to
offer all necessary assistance for their advancement.
The parties also commit to immediately implement their
respective obligations under the performance-based road map to
a permanent two-state solution to the Israel-Palestinian conflict,
issued by the Quartet on 30 April 2003 — this is called the
road map — and agree to form an American, Palestinian and
Israeli mechanism, led by the United States, to follow up on the
implementation of the road map.
The parties further commit to continue the implementation of
the ongoing obligations of the road map until they reach a peace
treaty. The United States will monitor and judge the fulfillment of
the commitment of both sides of the road map. Unless otherwise
agreed by the parties, implementation of the future peace treaty
will be subject to the implementation of the road map, as judged
by the United States.
Congratulations for your strong leadership.
The Palestinian people are blessed with many gifts and talents.
They want the opportunity to use those gifts to better their own
lives and build a better future for their children. They want the
dignity that comes with sovereignty and independence. They want
————
516

justice and equality under the rule of law. They want freedom from
violence and fear.
The people of Israel have just aspirations, as well. They want
their children to be able to ride a bus or to go to school without
fear of suicide bombers. They want an end to rocket attacks and
constant threats of assault. They want their nation to be recognized
and welcomed in the region where they live.
Today, Palestinians and Israelis each understand that helping
the other to realize their aspirations is key to realizing their own
aspirations — and both require an independent, democratic, viable
Palestinian state. Such a state will provide Palestinians with the
chance to lead lives of freedom and purpose and dignity. Such a
state will help provide the Israelis with something they have been
seeking for generations: to live in peace with their neighbors.
Achieving this goal is not going to be easy — if it were easy,
it would have happened a long time ago. To achieve freedom
and peace, both Israelis and Palestinians will have to make tough
choices. Both sides are sober about the work ahead, but having
spent time with their leaders, they are ready to take on the tough
issues. As Prime Minister Olmert recently put it, “We will avoid
none of [the historic questions], we will not run from discussing
any of them.” As President Abbas has said: “I believe that there
is an opportunity not only for us but for the Israelis, too. We have
a historic and important opportunity that we must benefit from.”
It is with that spirit that we concluded — that they concluded this
statement I just read.
Our purpose here in Annapolis is not to conclude an
agreement. Rather, it is to launch negotiations between the Israelis
and the Palestinians. For the rest of us, our job is to encourage the
parties in this effort — and to give them the support they need to
succeed.
In light of recent developments, some have suggested that now
is not the right time to pursue peace. I disagree. I believe now is
precisely the right time to begin these negotiations — for a number
of reasons:
————
517

First, the time is right because Palestinians and Israelis have
leaders who are determined to achieve peace. President Abbas
seeks to fulfill his people’s aspirations for statehood, dignity and
security. President Abbas understands that a Palestinian state will
not be born of terror, and that terrorism is the enemy standing
in the way of a state. He and Prime Minister Fayyad have both
declared, without hesitation, that they are opposed to terrorism
and committed to peace. They’re committed to turning these
declarations into actions on the ground to combat terror.
The emergence of responsible Palestinian leaders has
given Israeli leaders the confidence they need to reach out to
the Palestinians in true partnership. Prime Minister Olmert has
expressed his understanding of the suffering and indignities felt by
the Palestinian people. He’s made clear that the security of Israel
will be enhanced by the establishment of a responsible, democratic
Palestinian state. With leaders of courage and conviction on both
sides, now is the time to come together and seek the peace that
both sides desire.
Second, the time is right because a battle is underway for
the future of the Middle East — and we must not cede victory
to the extremists. With their violent actions and contempt for
human life, the extremists are seeking to impose a dark vision on
the Palestinian people — a vision that feeds on hopelessness and
despair to sow chaos in the Holy Land. If this vision prevails, the
future of the region will be endless terror, endless war, and endless
suffering.
Standing against this dark vision are President Abbas and his
government. They are offering the Palestinian people an
alternative vision for the future — a vision of peace, a homeland
of their own, and a better life. If responsible Palestinian leaders
can deliver on this vision, they will deal the forces of extremism a
devastating blow. And when liberty takes root in the rocky soil of
the West Bank and Gaza, it will inspire millions across the Middle
East who want their societies built on freedom and peace and
hope.
————
518

By contrast, if Palestinian reformers cannot deliver on this
hopeful vision, then the forces of extremism and terror will be
strengthened, a generation of Palestinians could be lost to the
extremists, and the Middle East will grow in despair. We cannot
allow this to happen. Now is the time to show Palestinians that
their dream of a free and independent state can be achieved at
the table of peace — and that the terror and violence preached by
Palestinian extremists is the greatest obstacle to a Palestinian state.
Third, the time is right because the world understands the
urgency of supporting these negotiations. We appreciate that
representatives from so many governments and international
institutions have come to join us here in Annapolis — especially
the Arab world. We’re here because we recognize what is at stake.
We are here because we each have a vital role to play in helping
Palestinians forge the institutions of a free society. We’re here
because we understand that the success of these efforts to achieve
peace between Israelis and Palestinians will have an impact far
beyond the Holy Land.
These are the reasons we’ve gathered here in Annapolis.
And now we begin the difficult work of freedom and peace. The
United States is proud to host this meeting — and we reaffirm the
path to peace set out in the road map. Yet in the end, the outcome
of the negotiations they launch here depends on the Israelis and
Palestinians themselves. America will do everything in our power
to support their quest for peace, but we cannot achieve it for them.
The success of these efforts will require that all parties show
patience and flexibility — and meet their responsibilities.
For these negotiations to succeed, the Palestinians must do
their part. They must show the world they understand that while
the borders of a Palestinian state are important, the nature of a
Palestinian state is just as important. They must demonstrate that
a Palestinian state will create opportunity for all its citizens, and
govern justly, and dismantle the infrastructure of terror. They must
show that a Palestinian state will accept its responsibility, and have
the capability to be a source of stability and peace — for its own
————
519

citizens, for the people of Israel, and for the whole region.
The Israelis must do their part. They must show the world that
they are ready to begin — to bring an end to the occupation that
began in 1967 through a negotiated settlement. This settlement
will establish Palestine as a Palestinian homeland, just as Israel
is a homeland for the Jewish people. Israel must demonstrate its
support for the creation of a prosperous and successful Palestinian
state by removing unauthorized outposts, ending settlement
expansion, and finding other ways for the Palestinian Authority to
exercise its responsibilities without compromising Israel’s security.
Arab states also have a vital role to play. Relaunching the Arab
League initiative and the Arab League’s support for today’s
conference are positive steps. All Arab states should show their
strong support for the government of President Abbas — and
provide needed assistance to the Palestinian Authority. Arab states
should also reach out to Israel, work toward the normalization of
relations, and demonstrate in both word and deed that they believe
that Israel and its people have a permanent home in the Middle
East. These are vital steps toward the comprehensive peace that we
all seek.
Finally, the international community has important
responsibilities. Prime Minister Fayyad is finalizing a plan to
increase openness and transparency and accountability throughout
Palestinian society — and he needs the resources and support
from the international community. With strong backing from
those gathered here, the Palestinian government can build the free
institutions that will support a free Palestinian state.
The United States will help Palestinian leaders build these free
institutions — and the United States will keep its commitment to
the security of Israel as a Jewish state and homeland for the Jewish
people.
The United States strongly feels that these efforts will yield the
peace that we want — and that is why we will continue to support
the Lebanese people. We believe democracy brings peace. And
democracy in Lebanon is vital, as well, for the peace in the Middle
————
520

East. Lebanese people are in the process of electing a president.
That decision is for the Lebanese people to make — and they must
be able to do so free from outside interference and intimidation.
As they embark on this process, the people of Lebanon can know
that the American people stand with them — and we look forward
to the day when the people of Lebanon can enjoy the blessings of
liberty without fear of violence or coercion.
The task begun here at Annapolis will be difficult. This is the
beginning of the process, not the end of it — and no doubt a lot of
work remains to be done. Yet the parties can approach this work
with confidence. The time is right. The cause is just. And with hard
effort, I know they can succeed.
President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert, I pledge to devote
my effort during my time as President to do all I can to help you
achieve this ambitious goal. I give you my personal commitment to
support your work with the resources and resolve of the American
government. I believe a day is coming when freedom will yield the
peace we desire. And the land that is holy to so many will see the
light of peace.
The day is coming when Palestinians will enjoy the blessings
that freedom brings — and all Israelis will enjoy the security they
deserve. That day is coming. The day is coming when the terrorists
and extremists who threaten the Israeli and Palestinian people
will be marginalized and eventually defeated. And when that day
comes, future generations will look to the work we began here at
Annapolis. They will give thanks to the leaders who gathered on
the banks of the Chesapeake for their vision, their wisdom and
courage to choose a future of freedom and peace.
Thanks for coming. May God bless their work.


Thank you. Good evening. Laura and I welcome you to the
White House. Mr. Attorney General, thank you for being here.
Secretary Chertoff, and family. Hanukkah is a time of joy and
festivity in the Jewish religion. We’re honored to gather with
members of the Jewish community to celebrate this holiday.
During Hanukkah, we remember an ancient struggle for
freedom. More than two thousand years ago, a cruel tyrant ruled
Judea — and forbade the Israelites from practicing their religion.
A band of brothers came together to fight this oppression. And
against incredible odds, they liberated the capital city of Jerusalem.
As they set about rededicating the holy temple, they witnessed a
great miracle: That purified oil that was supposed to last for one
day burned for eight.
Jewish families commemorate this miracle by lighting the
menorah for the eight nights of Hanukkah. The Talmud instructs
families to place the menorah in public view — so the entire world
can see its light. The flames remind us that light triumphs over
darkness, faith conquers despair, and the desire for freedom burns
inside every man, woman and child.
As we light the Hanukkah candles this year, we pray for those
who still live under the shadow of tyranny. This afternoon, I met
with a group of Jewish immigrants to mark International Human
Rights Day. Many of these men and women fled from religious
oppression in countries like Iran and Syria and the Soviet Union.
They came to America because our nation is a beacon of freedom.
And they see a day of hope on the horizon when people all across
the world will worship in freedom. The forces of intolerance can
suppress the menorah — but they can never extinguish its light.
————
523

The menorah we light tonight has special meaning. It once
belonged to Chayim Pearl — who was the great-grandfather
of Wall Street Journal reporter, Daniel Pearl. While reporting
in Pakistan in 2002, Daniel was kidnapped and murdered by
terrorists. His only crime was being a Jewish American —
something Daniel Pearl would never deny. In his final moments,
Daniel told his captors about a street in Israel named for his greatgrandfather. He looked into their camera and he said, “My father is
Jewish, my mother is Jewish, and I’m Jewish.” These words have
become a source of inspiration for Americans of all faiths. They
show the courage of a man who refused to bow before terror —
and the strength of a spirit that could not be broken.
Daniel’s memory remains close to our hearts. Those who
knew him best remember a gifted writer who loved the violin,
and made friends wherever he went. We’re honored that Daniel’s
parents — Ruth and Judea — have joined us today. We thank
them for their work on behalf of the Daniel Pearl Foundation. The
foundation helps bring people from different cultures together
through journalism and music. It’s a fitting tribute to Daniel’s
lifelong pursuit of truth and tolerance. By honoring Daniel, we
are given the opportunity to bring forth hope from the darkness
of tragedy — and that is a miracle worth celebrating during the
Festival of Lights.
Laura and I wish people of Jewish faith around the world a
happy Hanukkah. May God bless you all. Tonight, we will hear
a wonderful performance by the Zamir Chorale. But first I ask
Ruth and Judea to light the Pearl family menorah, and lead the
blessings.

Madam Speaker, Vice President Cheney, members of
Congress, distinguished guests, and fellow citizens: Seven years
have passed since I first stood before you at this rostrum. In that
time, our country has been tested in ways none of us could have
imagined. We faced hard decisions about peace and war, rising
competition in the world economy, and the health and welfare
of our citizens. These issues call for vigorous debate, and I think
it’s fair to say we’ve answered the call. Yet history will record
that amid our differences, we acted with purpose. And together,
we showed the world the power and resilience of American selfgovernment.
All of us were sent to Washington to carry out the people’s
business. That is the purpose of this body. It is the meaning of our
oath. It remains our charge to keep.
The actions of the 110th Congress will affect the security and
prosperity of our nation long after this session has ended. In this
election year, let us show our fellow Americans that we recognize
our responsibilities and are determined to meet them. Let us show
them that Republicans and Democrats can compete for votes and
cooperate for results at the same time.
From expanding opportunity to protecting our country, we’ve
made good progress. Yet we have unfinished business before us,
and the American people expect us to get it done.
In the work ahead, we must be guided by the philosophy that
made our nation great. As Americans, we believe in the power
of individuals to determine their destiny and shape the course of
history. We believe that the most reliable guide for our country is
the collective wisdom of ordinary citizens. And so in all we do, we
————
525

must trust in the ability of free peoples to make wise decisions, and
empower them to improve their lives for their futures.
To build a prosperous future, we must trust people with their
own money and empower them to grow our economy. As we
meet tonight, our economy is undergoing a period of uncertainty.
America has added jobs for a record 52 straight months, but jobs
are now growing at a slower pace. Wages are up, but so are prices
for food and gas. Exports are rising, but the housing market has
declined. At kitchen tables across our country, there is a concern
about our economic future.
In the long run, Americans can be confident about our
economic growth. But in the short run, we can all see that that
growth is slowing. So last week, my administration reached
agreement with Speaker Pelosi and Republican Leader Boehner on
a robust growth package that includes tax relief for individuals and
families and incentives for business investment. The temptation
will be to load up the bill. That would delay it or derail it, and
neither option is acceptable. This is a good agreement that will
keep our economy growing and our people working. And this
Congress must pass it as soon as possible.
We have other work to do on taxes. Unless Congress acts, most
of the tax relief we’ve delivered over the past seven years will be
taken away. Some in Washington argue that letting tax relief expire
is not a tax increase. Try explaining that to 116 million American
taxpayers who would see their taxes rise by an average of $1,800.
Others have said they would personally be happy to pay higher
taxes. I welcome their enthusiasm. I’m pleased to report that the
IRS accepts both checks and money orders.
Most Americans think their taxes are high enough. With all
the other pressures on their finances, American families should
not have to worry about their federal government taking a bigger
bite out of their paychecks. There’s only one way to eliminate
this uncertainty: Make the tax relief permanent. And members of
Congress should know: If any bill raises taxes reaches my desk, I
will veto it.
————
526

Just as we trust Americans with their own money, we need to
earn their trust by spending their tax dollars wisely. Next week,
I’ll send you a budget that terminates or substantially reduces 151
wasteful or bloated programs, totaling more than $18 billion. The
budget that I will submit will keep America on track for a surplus
in 2012. American families have to balance their budgets; so
should their government.
The people’s trust in their government is undermined by
congressional earmarks — special interest projects that are often
snuck in at the last minute, without discussion or debate. Last year,
I asked you to voluntarily cut the number and cost of earmarks in
half. I also asked you to stop slipping earmarks into committee
reports that never even come to a vote. Unfortunately, neither goal
was met. So this time, if you send me an appropriations bill that
does not cut the number and cost of earmarks in half, I’ll send it
back to you with my veto.
And tomorrow, I will issue an executive order that directs
federal agencies to ignore any future earmark that is not voted
on by Congress. If these items are truly worth funding, Congress
should debate them in the open and hold a public vote.
Our shared responsibilities extend beyond matters of taxes
and spending. On housing, we must trust Americans with the
responsibility of homeownership and empower them to weather
turbulent times in the housing market. My administration brought
together the HOPE NOW alliance, which is helping many
struggling homeowners avoid foreclosure. And Congress can
help even more. Tonight I ask you to pass legislation to reform
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, modernize the Federal Housing
Administration, and allow state housing agencies to issue tax-free
bonds to help homeowners refinance their mortgages. These are
difficult times for many American families, and by taking these
steps, we can help more of them keep their homes.
To build a future of quality health care, we must trust patients
and doctors to make medical decisions and empower them
with better information and better options. We share a common
————
527

goal: making health care more affordable and accessible for all
Americans. The best way to achieve that goal is by expanding
consumer choice, not government control. So I have proposed
ending the bias in the tax code against those who do not get their
health insurance through their employer. This one reform would
put private coverage within reach for millions, and I call on the
Congress to pass it this year.
The Congress must also expand health savings accounts, create
Association Health Plans for small businesses, promote health
information technology, and confront the epidemic of junk medical
lawsuits. With all these steps, we will help ensure that decisions
about your medical care are made in the privacy of your doctor’s
office — not in the halls of Congress.
On education, we must trust students to learn if given the
chance, and empower parents to demand results from our schools.
In neighborhoods across our country, there are boys and girls with
dreams — and a decent education is their only hope of achieving
them.
Six years ago, we came together to pass the No Child Left
Behind Act, and today no one can deny its results. Last year, fourth
and eighth graders achieved the highest math scores on record.
Reading scores are on the rise. African American and Hispanic
students posted all-time highs. Now we must work together to
increase accountability, add flexibility for states and districts,
reduce the number of high school dropouts, provide extra help for
struggling schools.
Members of Congress: The No Child Left Behind Act is
a bipartisan achievement. It is succeeding. And we owe it to
America’s children, their parents, and their teachers to strengthen
this good law.
We must also do more to help children when their schools do
not measure up. Thanks to the D.C. Opportunity Scholarships you
approved, more than 2,600 of the poorest children in our Nation’s
Capital have found new hope at a faith-based or other non-public
school. Sadly, these schools are disappearing at an alarming rate in
————
528

many of America’s inner cities. So I will convene a White House
summit aimed at strengthening these lifelines of learning. And
to open the doors of these schools to more children, I ask you to
support a new $300 million program called Pell Grants for Kids. We
have seen how Pell Grants help low-income college students realize
their full potential. Together, we’ve expanded the size and reach of
these grants. Now let us apply that same spirit to help liberate poor
children trapped in failing public schools.
On trade, we must trust American workers to compete with
anyone in the world and empower them by opening up new markets
overseas. Today, our economic growth increasingly depends on
our ability to sell American goods and crops and services all over
the world. So we’re working to break down barriers to trade and
investment wherever we can. We’re working for a successful Doha
Round of trade talks, and we must complete a good agreement this
year. At the same time, we’re pursuing opportunities to open up
new markets by passing free trade agreements.
I thank the Congress for approving a good agreement with
Peru. And now I ask you to approve agreements with Colombia and
Panama and South Korea. Many products from these nations now
enter America duty-free, yet many of our products face steep tariffs
in their markets. These agreements will level the playing field. They
will give us better access to nearly 100 million customers. They will
support good jobs for the finest workers in the world: those whose
products say “Made in the USA.”
These agreements also promote America’s strategic interests.
The first agreement that will come before you is with Colombia,
a friend of America that is confronting violence and terror, and
fighting drug traffickers. If we fail to pass this agreement, we will
embolden the purveyors of false populism in our hemisphere. So we
must come together, pass this agreement, and show our neighbors in
the region that democracy leads to a better life.
Trade brings better jobs and better choices and better prices.
Yet for some Americans, trade can mean losing a job, and the
federal government has a responsibility to help. I ask Congress to
————
529

reauthorize and reform trade adjustment assistance, so we can
help these displaced workers learn new skills and find new jobs.
To build a future of energy security, we must trust in the
creative genius of American researchers and entrepreneurs and
empower them to pioneer a new generation of clean energy
technology. Our security, our prosperity, and our environment all
require reducing our dependence on oil. Last year, I asked you to
pass legislation to reduce oil consumption over the next decade,
and you responded. Together we should take the next steps: Let
us fund new technologies that can generate coal power while
capturing carbon emissions. Let us increase the use of renewable
power and emissions-free nuclear power. Let us continue
investing in advanced battery technology and renewable fuels
to power the cars and trucks of the future. Let us create a new
international clean technology fund, which will help developing
nations like India and China make greater use of clean energy
sources. And let us complete an international agreement that has
the potential to slow, stop, and eventually reverse the growth of
greenhouse gases.
This agreement will be effective only if it includes
commitments by every major economy and gives none a free
ride. The United States is committed to strengthening our energy
security and confronting global climate change. And the best way
to meet these goals is for America to continue leading the way
toward the development of cleaner and more energy-efficient
technology.
To keep America competitive into the future, we must trust
in the skill of our scientists and engineers and empower them to
pursue the breakthroughs of tomorrow. Last year, Congress passed
legislation supporting the American Competitiveness Initiative,
but never followed through with the funding. This funding is
essential to keeping our scientific edge. So I ask Congress to
double federal support for critical basic research in the physical
sciences and ensure America remains the most dynamic nation on
Earth.
————
530

On matters of life and science, we must trust in the innovative
spirit of medical researchers and empower them to discover new
treatments while respecting moral boundaries. In November, we
witnessed a landmark achievement when scientists discovered a
way to reprogram adult skin cells to act like embryonic stem cells.
This breakthrough has the potential to move us beyond the divisive
debates of the past by extending the frontiers of medicine without
the destruction of human life.
So we’re expanding funding for this type of ethical medical
research. And as we explore promising avenues of research, we
must also ensure that all life is treated with the dignity it deserves.
And so I call on Congress to pass legislation that bans unethical
practices such as the buying, selling, patenting, or cloning of human
life.
On matters of justice, we must trust in the wisdom of our
founders and empower judges who understand that the Constitution
means what it says. I’ve submitted judicial nominees who will
rule by the letter of the law, not the whim of the gavel. Many of
these nominees are being unfairly delayed. They are worthy of
confirmation, and the Senate should give each of them a prompt upor-down vote.
In communities across our land, we must trust in the good heart
of the American people and empower them to serve their neighbors
in need. Over the past seven years, more of our fellow citizens
have discovered that the pursuit of happiness leads to the path of
service. Americans have volunteered in record numbers. Charitable
donations are higher than ever. Faith-based groups are bringing
hope to pockets of despair, with newfound support from the federal
government. And to help guarantee equal treatment of faith-based
organizations when they compete for federal funds, I ask you to
permanently extend Charitable Choice.
Tonight the armies of compassion continue the march to a new
day in the Gulf Coast. America honors the strength and resilience
of the people of this region. We reaffirm our pledge to help them
build stronger and better than before. And tonight I’m pleased
————
531

to announce that in April we will host this year’s North American
Summit of Canada, Mexico, and the United States in the great city of
New Orleans.
There are two other pressing challenges that I’ve raised
repeatedly before this body, and that this body has failed to address:
entitlement spending and immigration. Every member in this
chamber knows that spending on entitlement programs like Social
Security, Medicare, and Medicaid is growing faster than we can
afford. We all know the painful choices ahead if America stays
on this path: massive tax increases, sudden and drastic cuts in
benefits, or crippling deficits. I’ve laid out proposals to reform these
programs. Now I ask members of Congress to offer your proposals
and come up with a bipartisan solution to save these vital programs
for our children and our grandchildren.
The other pressing challenge is immigration. America needs
to secure our borders — and with your help, my administration
is taking steps to do so. We’re increasing worksite enforcement,
deploying fences and advanced technologies to stop illegal crossings.
We’ve effectively ended the policy of “catch and release” at the
border, and by the end of this year, we will have doubled the
number of border patrol agents. Yet we also need to acknowledge
that we will never fully secure our border until we create a lawful
way for foreign workers to come here and support our economy.
This will take pressure off the border and allow law enforcement
to concentrate on those who mean us harm. We must also find a
sensible and humane way to deal with people here illegally. Illegal
immigration is complicated, but it can be resolved. And it must be
resolved in a way that upholds both our laws and our highest ideals.
This is the business of our nation here at home. Yet building a
prosperous future for our citizens also depends on confronting
enemies abroad and advancing liberty in troubled regions of the
world.
Our foreign policy is based on a clear premise: We trust that
people, when given the chance, will choose a future of freedom and
peace. In the last seven years, we have witnessed stirring moments
————
532

in the history of liberty. We’ve seen citizens in Georgia and Ukraine
stand up for their right to free and fair elections. We’ve seen people
in Lebanon take to the streets to demand their independence. We’ve
seen Afghans emerge from the tyranny of the Taliban and choose
a new president and a new parliament. We’ve seen jubilant Iraqis
holding up ink-stained fingers and celebrating their freedom. These
images of liberty have inspired us.
In the past seven years, we’ve also seen images that have
sobered us. We’ve watched throngs of mourners in Lebanon and
Pakistan carrying the caskets of beloved leaders taken by the
assassin’s hand. We’ve seen wedding guests in blood-soaked finery
staggering from a hotel in Jordan, Afghans and Iraqis blown up
in mosques and markets, and trains in London and Madrid ripped
apart by bombs. On a clear September day, we saw thousands of our
fellow citizens taken from us in an instant. These horrific images
serve as a grim reminder: The advance of liberty is opposed by
terrorists and extremists — evil men who despise freedom, despise
America, and aim to subject millions to their violent rule.
Since 9/11, we have taken the fight to these terrorists and
extremists. We will stay on the offense, we will keep up the pressure,
and we will deliver justice to our enemies.
We are engaged in the defining ideological struggle of the 21st
century. The terrorists oppose every principle of humanity and
decency that we hold dear. Yet in this war on terror, there is one
thing we and our enemies agree on: In the long run, men and women
who are free to determine their own destinies will reject terror and
refuse to live in tyranny. And that is why the terrorists are fighting
to deny this choice to the people in Lebanon, Iraq, Afghanistan,
Pakistan, and the Palestinian Territories. And that is why, for the
security of America and the peace of the world, we are spreading the
hope of freedom.
In Afghanistan, America, our 25 NATO allies, and 15 partner
nations are helping the Afghan people defend their freedom and
rebuild their country. Thanks to the courage of these military and
civilian personnel, a nation that was once a safe haven for al Qaeda
————
533

is now a young democracy where boys and girls are going to school,
new roads and hospitals are being built, and people are looking to
the future with new hope. These successes must continue, so we’re
adding 3,200 Marines to our forces in Afghanistan, where they will
fight the terrorists and train the Afghan Army and police. Defeating
the Taliban and al Qaeda is critical to our security, and I thank the
Congress for supporting America’s vital mission in Afghanistan.
In Iraq, the terrorists and extremists are fighting to deny a proud
people their liberty, and fighting to establish safe havens for attacks
across the world. One year ago, our enemies were succeeding in
their efforts to plunge Iraq into chaos. So we reviewed our strategy
and changed course. We launched a surge of American forces into
Iraq. We gave our troops a new mission: Work with the Iraqi forces
to protect the Iraqi people, pursue the enemy in its strongholds, and
deny the terrorists sanctuary anywhere in the country.
The Iraqi people quickly realized that something dramatic
had happened. Those who had worried that America was preparing
to abandon them instead saw tens of thousands of American
forces flowing into their country. They saw our forces moving into
neighborhoods, clearing out the terrorists, and staying behind to
ensure the enemy did not return. And they saw our troops, along
with Provincial Reconstruction Teams that include Foreign Service
officers and other skilled public servants, coming in to ensure that
improved security was followed by improvements in daily life.
Our military and civilians in Iraq are performing with courage and
distinction, and they have the gratitude of our whole nation.
The Iraqis launched a surge of their own. In the fall of 2006,
Sunni tribal leaders grew tired of al Qaeda’s brutality and started
a popular uprising called “The Anbar Awakening.” Over the past
year, similar movements have spread across the country. And today,
the grassroots surge includes more than 80,000 Iraqi citizens who
are fighting the terrorists. The government in Baghdad has stepped
forward, as well — adding more than 100,000 new Iraqi soldiers and
police during the past year.
While the enemy is still dangerous and more work remains, the
————
534

American and Iraqi surges have achieved results few of us could
have imagined just one year ago. When we met last year, many
said that containing the violence was impossible. A year later,
high profile terrorist attacks are down, civilian deaths are down,
sectarian killings are down.
When we met last year, militia extremists — some armed and
trained by Iran — were wreaking havoc in large areas of Iraq.
A year later, coalition and Iraqi forces have killed or captured
hundreds of militia fighters. And Iraqis of all backgrounds
increasingly realize that defeating these militia fighters is critical
to the future of their country.
When we met last year, al Qaeda had sanctuaries in many
areas of Iraq, and their leaders had just offered American forces
safe passage out of the country. Today, it is al Qaeda that is
searching for safe passage. They have been driven from many
of the strongholds they once held, and over the past year, we’ve
captured or killed thousands of extremists in Iraq, including
hundreds of key al Qaeda leaders and operatives.
Last month, Osama bin Laden released a tape in which he
railed against Iraqi tribal leaders who have turned on al Qaeda and
admitted that coalition forces are growing stronger in Iraq. Ladies
and gentlemen, some may deny the surge is working, but among
the terrorists there is no doubt. Al Qaeda is on the run in Iraq, and
this enemy will be defeated.
When we met last year, our troop levels in Iraq were on
the rise. Today, because of the progress just described, we are
implementing a policy of “return on success,” and the surge forces
we sent to Iraq are beginning to come home.
This progress is a credit to the valor of our troops and the
brilliance of their commanders. This evening, I want to speak
directly to our men and women on the front lines. Soldiers and
sailors, airmen, Marines, and Coast Guardsmen: In the past
year, you have done everything we’ve asked of you, and more.
Our nation is grateful for your courage. We are proud of your
accomplishments. And tonight in this hallowed chamber, with the
————
535

American people as our witness, we make you a solemn pledge: In
the fight ahead, you will have all you need to protect our nation. And
I ask Congress to meet its responsibilities to these brave men and
women by fully funding our troops.
Our enemies in Iraq have been hit hard. They are not yet
defeated, and we can still expect tough fighting ahead. Our objective
in the coming year is to sustain and build on the gains we made in
2007, while transitioning to the next phase of our strategy. American
troops are shifting from leading operations, to partnering with
Iraqi forces, and, eventually, to a protective overwatch mission.
As part of this transition, one Army brigade combat team and one
Marine Expeditionary Unit have already come home and will not be
replaced. In the coming months, four additional brigades and two
Marine battalions will follow suit. Taken together, this means more
than 20,000 of our troops are coming home.
Any further drawdown of U.S. troops will be based on conditions
in Iraq and the recommendations of our commanders. General
Petraeus has warned that too fast a drawdown could result in the
“disintegration of the Iraqi security forces, al Qaeda-Iraq regaining
lost ground, [and] a marked increase in violence.” Members of
Congress: Having come so far and achieved so much, we must not
allow this to happen.
In the coming year, we will work with Iraqi leaders as they build
on the progress they’re making toward political reconciliation. At the
local level, Sunnis, Shia, and Kurds are beginning to come together
to reclaim their communities and rebuild their lives. Progress in the
provinces must be matched by progress in Baghdad. We’re seeing
some encouraging signs. The national government is sharing oil
revenues with the provinces. The parliament recently passed both
a pension law and de-Baathification reform. They’re now debating
a provincial powers law. The Iraqis still have a distance to travel.
But after decades of dictatorship and the pain of sectarian violence,
reconciliation is taking place — and the Iraqi people are taking
control of their future.
The mission in Iraq has been difficult and trying for our nation.
————
536

But it is in the vital interest of the United States that we succeed.
A free Iraq will deny al Qaeda a safe haven. A free Iraq will show
millions across the Middle East that a future of liberty is possible. A
free Iraq will be a friend of America, a partner in fighting terror, and
a source of stability in a dangerous part of the world.
By contrast, a failed Iraq would embolden the extremists,
strengthen Iran, and give terrorists a base from which to launch new
attacks on our friends, our allies, and our homeland. The enemy has
made its intentions clear. At a time when the momentum seemed to
favor them, al Qaida’s top commander in Iraq declared that they will
not rest until they have attacked us here in Washington. My fellow
Americans: We will not rest either. We will not rest until this enemy
has been defeated. We must do the difficult work today, so that
years from now people will look back and say that this generation
rose to the moment, prevailed in a tough fight, and left behind a
more hopeful region and a safer America.
We’re also standing against the forces of extremism in the Holy
Land, where we have new cause for hope. Palestinians have elected
a president who recognizes that confronting terror is essential to
achieving a state where his people can live in dignity and at peace
with Israel. Israelis have leaders who recognize that a peaceful,
democratic Palestinian state will be a source of lasting security. This
month in Ramallah and Jerusalem, I assured leaders from both sides
that America will do, and I will do, everything we can to help them
achieve a peace agreement that defines a Palestinian state by the end
of this year. The time has come for a Holy Land where a democratic
Israel and a democratic Palestine live side-by-side in peace.
We’re also standing against the forces of extremism embodied
by the regime in Tehran. Iran’s rulers oppress a good and talented
people. And wherever freedom advances in the Middle East, it
seems the Iranian regime is there to oppose it. Iran is funding and
training militia groups in Iraq, supporting Hezbollah terrorists in
Lebanon, and backing Hamas’ efforts to undermine peace in the
Holy Land. Tehran is also developing ballistic missiles of increasing
range, and continues to develop its capability to enrich uranium,
————
537

which could be used to create a nuclear weapon.
Our message to the people of Iran is clear: We have no quarrel
with you. We respect your traditions and your history. We look
forward to the day when you have your freedom. Our message to
the leaders of Iran is also clear: Verifiably suspend your nuclear
enrichment, so negotiations can begin. And to rejoin the community
of nations, come clean about your nuclear intentions and past
actions, stop your oppression at home, cease your support for terror
abroad. But above all, know this: America will confront those who
threaten our troops. We will stand by our allies, and we will defend
our vital interests in the Persian Gulf.
On the home front, we will continue to take every lawful and
effective measure to protect our country. This is our most solemn
duty. We are grateful that there has not been another attack on our
soil since 9/11. This is not for the lack of desire or effort on the part
of the enemy. In the past six years, we’ve stopped numerous attacks,
including a plot to fly a plane into the tallest building in Los Angeles
and another to blow up passenger jets bound for America over the
Atlantic. Dedicated men and women in our government toil day and
night to stop the terrorists from carrying out their plans. These good
citizens are saving American lives, and everyone in this chamber
owes them our thanks.
And we owe them something more: We owe them the tools they
need to keep our people safe. And one of the most important tools
we can give them is the ability to monitor terrorist communications.
To protect America, we need to know who the terrorists are talking
to, what they are saying, and what they’re planning. Last year,
Congress passed legislation to help us do that. Unfortunately,
Congress set the legislation to expire on February the 1st. That
means if you don’t act by Friday, our ability to track terrorist threats
would be weakened and our citizens will be in greater danger.
Congress must ensure the flow of vital intelligence is not disrupted.
Congress must pass liability protection for companies believed to
have assisted in the efforts to defend America. We’ve had ample
time for debate. The time to act is now.
————
538

Protecting our nation from the dangers of a new century
requires more than good intelligence and a strong military. It also
requires changing the conditions that breed resentment and allow
extremists to prey on despair. So America is using its influence
to build a freer, more hopeful, and more compassionate world.
This is a reflection of our national interest; it is the calling of our
conscience.
America opposes genocide in Sudan. We support freedom in
countries from Cuba and Zimbabwe to Belarus and Burma.
America is leading the fight against global poverty, with
strong education initiatives and humanitarian assistance. We’ve
also changed the way we deliver aid by launching the Millennium
Challenge Account. This program strengthens democracy,
transparency, and the rule of law in developing nations, and I ask
you to fully fund this important initiative.
America is leading the fight against global hunger. Today, more
than half the world’s food aid comes from the United States. And
tonight, I ask Congress to support an innovative proposal to provide
food assistance by purchasing crops directly from farmers in the
developing world, so we can build up local agriculture and help
break the cycle of famine.
America is leading the fight against disease. With your help,
we’re working to cut by half the number of malaria-related deaths
in 15 African nations. And our Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief is
treating 1.4 million people. We can bring healing and hope to many
more. So I ask you to maintain the principles that have changed
behavior and made this program a success. And I call on you to
double our initial commitment to fighting HIV/AIDS by approving
an additional $30 billion over the next five years.
America is a force for hope in the world because we are
a compassionate people, and some of the most compassionate
Americans are those who have stepped forward to protect us. We
must keep faith with all who have risked life and limb so that we
might live in freedom and peace. Over the past seven years, we’ve
increased funding for veterans by more than 95 percent. And as we
————
539

increase funding — And as increase funding we must also reform
our veterans system to meet the needs of a new war and a new
generation. I call on the Congress to enact the reforms recommended
by Senator Bob Dole and Secretary Donna Shalala, so we can
improve the system of care for our wounded warriors and help them
build lives of hope and promise and dignity.
Our military families also sacrifice for America. They endure
sleepless nights and the daily struggle of providing for children while
a loved one is serving far from home. We have a responsibility to
provide for them. So I ask you to join me in expanding their access to
child care, creating new hiring preferences for military spouses across
the federal government, and allowing our troops to transfer their
unused education benefits to their spouses or children. Our military
families serve our nation, they inspire our nation, and tonight our
nation honors them.
The strength — the secret of our strength, the miracle of
America, is that our greatness lies not in our government, but in the
spirit and determination of our people. When the Federal Convention
met in Philadelphia in 1787, our nation was bound by the Articles of
Confederation, which began with the words, “We the undersigned
delegates.” When Gouverneur Morris was asked to draft a preamble
to our new Constitution, he offered an important revision and opened
with words that changed the course of our nation and the history of
the world: “We the people.”
By trusting the people, our Founders wagered that a great and
noble nation could be built on the liberty that resides in the hearts of
all men and women. By trusting the people, succeeding generations
transformed our fragile young democracy into the most powerful
nation on Earth and a beacon of hope for millions. And so long as we
continue to trust the people, our nation will prosper, our liberty will
be secure, and the state of our Union will remain strong.
So tonight, with confidence in freedom’s power, and trust in the
people, let us set forth to do their business. God bless America.


I’ve been looking forward to coming to the museum, and there’s
an added benefit, and that is, I get to be introduced by my wife on
Valentine’s Day. Happy Valentine’s.
This morning Laura and I join all Americans in honoring the
life of Congressman Tom Lantos. In his remarkable 80 years, Tom
Lantos survived the Nazi camps of Hungary to reach the halls of
Congress. As a representative from California, he was a fearless
defender of democracy, a powerful advocate of human rights, and a
strong supporter of the fight against HIV/AIDS.
Our prayers are with Annette and the Lantos family. We thank
God for his service.
Five years ago, Laura and I made our first visit to Africa. Since
then, as she mentioned, she’s taken three more trips. And every
time, she came back with fascinating stories, some of which she
just shared with you. And tomorrow, as she mentioned, we’re going
back, and I’m really looking forward to it.
We’re going to Benin, Tanzania, Rwanda, Ghana and Liberia.
Each of these countries is blessed with natural beauty, vibrant
culture, and an unmistakable spirit of energy and optimism. Africa
in the 21st century is a continent of potential. That’s how we view it.
I hope that’s how our fellow citizens view Africa. It’s a place where
democracy is advancing, where economies are growing, and leaders
are meeting challenges with purpose and determination.
Our visit will give me a chance to meet with people who are
making the transformation on the continent possible. I’m going
to witness the generosity of the American people firsthand. It
will give me a chance to remind our fellow citizens about what
a compassionate people we are. And I will assure our partners in
Africa that the United States is committed to them today, tomorrow,
————
541

and long into their continent’s bright future.
And so I thank you for giving us a chance to come and visit with
you. You could call this the send-off speech.
I really want to thank Mark Dybul. I love to support people who
are making history. I can’t think of any more noble history than to be
leading the compassionate effort of the American people to help save
lives. And Ambassador, you’re doing a fabulous job.
I also want to welcome Admiral Tim Ziemer. Admiral, good
to see you. He’s in charge of making sure that we meet our goals
in reducing the scourge of malaria. Thanks for coming. You and
Dybul are results-oriented people. Let me say, I’m a results-oriented
President, and so when I meet with you, I ask you, what are the
results? And you’ll hear in a minute they’re very positive.
I appreciate very much Dr. Samper and his wife Adriana for
welcoming us. Thank you for leading this important institute.
I also want to thank Sharon Patton, the Director of the
Smithsonian National Museum of African Art. Thanks for
welcoming us. It’s not so easy, like, to welcome the President. It
turns out the entourages are probably bigger than the visitors to
your museum, but thank you for coming. This is an important part
of the Washington scene. I’d urge our fellow citizens to come to this
important museum.
I want to thank the board members of the Smithsonian National
Museum of Africa Art who have joined us today.
I welcome Jendayi Frazer, Assistant Secretary of State for
African Af fairs. Are you going on the trip? Yes. Better get home and
pack. Thanks for coming. I’m proud to work with you.
Henrietta Fore, Administrator of USAID, is with us. Henrietta,
thanks for coming.
I better be careful about how I say this for fear of having a huge
burst of applause, but I’d like to introduce the Director of the Peace
Corps, Ron Tschetter. Ron, thanks for coming; it’s good to see you,
sir. And I appreciate you bringing the five-person cheering section
with you. There seems to be a groundswell here.
I welcome the members of the Diplomatic Corps. Thanks for
————
542

coming.
And finally I do also want to do what Mark did and thank
Chuck Dages of Warner Brothers for this trailer. It’s good. I
appreciate your support.
The museum is a testament to America’s long connection
to Africa. At least that’s how I view it. Africa is the birthplace
of humanity, the home of great civilizations, and the source
of enduring achievements in culture and art. Africa has also
witnessed some of mankind’s most shameful chapters — from the
evils of the slave trade to the condescension of colonialism. Even
the joy of independence — which arrived with such promise —
was undermined by corruption, conflict, and disease. Just a decade
ago, much of Africa seemed to be on the brink of collapse, and
much of the world seemed content to let it collapse.
Today, that’s changing. A new generation of African leaders is
stepping forward, and turning their continent around. International
organizations, and faith-based groups, and the private sector are
more engaged than ever. And in one of the major priorities of my
Presidency, the United States has fundamentally altered our policy
toward Africa.
America’s approach to Africa stems from both our ideals and
our interests. We believe that every human life is precious. We
believe that our brothers and sisters in Africa have dignity and
value, because they bear the mark of our Creator. We believe our
spirit is renewed when we help African children and families live
and thrive.
Africa is also increasingly vital to our strategic interests. We
have seen that conditions on the other side of the world can have
a direct impact on our own security. We know that if Africa were
to continue on the old path of decline, it would be more likely to
produce failed states, foster ideologies of radicalism, and spread
violence across borders. We also know that if Africa grows in
freedom, and prosperity, and justice, its people will choose a
better course. People who live in societies based on freedom and
justice are more likely to reject the false promise of the extremist
————
543

ideology. Citizens who see a future of opportunity are more likely
to build hopeful economies that benefit all the people. Nations that
replace disease and despair with healing and hope will help Africa do
more than just survive — it will help Africa succeed.
For all these reasons, America has dramatically increased
our commitment to development in Africa. We have also
revolutionized the way we approach development. Too many nations
continue to follow either the paternalistic notion that treats African
countries as charity cases, or a model of exploitation that seeks only
to buy up their resources. America rejects both approaches. Instead,
we are treating African leaders as equal partners, asking them to
set clear goals, and expecting them to produce measurable results.
For their part, more African leaders are willing to be held to high
standards. And together, we’re pioneering a new era in development.
The new era is rooted in a powerful truth: Africa’s most valuable
resource is not its oil, it’s not its diamonds, it is the talent and
creativity of its people. So we are partnering with African leaders to
empower their people to lift up their nations and write a new chapter
in their history.
First, we are working to empower Africans to overcome poverty
by helping them grow their economies. After a long period of
stagnation, many of Africa’s economies are springing to life. As a
whole, sub-Saharan Africa is projected to grow nearly 7 percent this
year. The economies of Ethiopia, Mozambique, and Tanzania are
among the fastest-growing in the world. And across Africa, poverty is
beginning to decline. Don’t get me wrong, it’s still a poor place, but
poverty is beginning to decline.
This resurgence shows the strength of the entrepreneurial spirit
in Africa. America is working to help unleash that spirit across the
continent. Along with our fellow G8 nations, we have relieved some
$34 billion in debt from African nations in the past 18 months. That
is roughly the same level of debt that was cancelled in the previous
11 years combined. We have also made historic increases in foreign
aid. In my first term, we more than doubled development assistance
to Africa — part of the largest expansion of American development
————
544

assistance since the Marshall Plan. At the beginning of my second
term, I promised to double our assistance again by 2010. And the
budget I sent Congress last week will ensure that we meet this
commitment.
And just as important, we’re changing the way we deliver
assistance. We created what’s called the Millennium Challenge
Account, which offers financial support to the world’s most
promising developing nations — nations that fight corruption,
nations that govern justly, nations that open up their economies, and
nations that invest in the health and education of their people.
America is serving as an investor, not a donor. We believe
that countries can adopt the habits necessary to provide help for
their people. That’s what we believe. And we’re willing to invest
in leaders that are doing just that. So far, more than two-thirds of
the MCA’s $5.5 billion is being invested in Africa. And on my trip
next week, I will sign the largest project in the program’s history —
nearly $700 million compact with Tanzania.
Other nations are seeing the benefits of these agreements.
They are moving ahead with the tough economic, political, and
social reforms necessary to compete for a compact of their own. In
fact, there is now more competition for funds than there are funds
available, which ought to say two things: One, that this is evidence
that the American taxpayers are getting good value for their dollars.
In other words, if nations are willing to fight corruption, work
on rule of law, support their people and not theirselves, then it
makes sense to invest with them. And secondly, it is evidence that
Congress needs to fully fund this important initiative.
The best way to generate economic growth in Africa is to
expand trade and investment. When businesses in Africa can
sell their products and services around the globe, they create a
culture of self-reliance and opportunity. One of the most powerful
incentives for trade is the African Growth and Opportunity Act. And
I appreciate the fact that Congress has extended this good law. Since
2001, exports from sub-Saharan Africa to the United States have
tripled. It’s also important for our citizens to know that U.S. exports
————
545

to sub-Saharan Africa have more than doubled.
On my visit to Ghana, I will meet entrepreneurs who are
benefiting from new access to U.S. markets. My message to them
will be clear, just like it is to the Congress: For the benefit of Africans
and for the benefit of Americans alike, we must maintain our
commitment to free and fair trade.
Attracting foreign capital is another key to growth. In recent
years, African nations have taken impressive steps to improve their
investment climates. According to a World Bank report, 16 countries
in sub-Saharan Africa recently adopted reforms to make it easier to
start a business and to register property. That may sound simple to
Americans, but these are important steps to be able to attract capital
for investment purposes. When investors look for a promising
market, they are increasingly turning to Africa. And in a hopeful sign,
private capital flows to sub-Saharan Africa now exceed development
assistance.
We’ve taken several steps to build on this progress. Last year, we
launched the Africa Financial Sector Initiative. As part of this effort,
our Overseas Private Investment Corporation mobilized $750 million
in investment capital for African businesses. Today, I’m announce
that OPIC will support five new investment funds that will mobilize
an additional $875 million, for a total of more than $1.6 billion in
new capital.
And next week, I’m going to sign a bilateral investment treaty
with Rwanda. This will be America’s first such treaty in sub-Saharan
Africa in nearly a decade. It reflects our shared commitment to
systems of fair and open investment. It will bring more capital
to Rwanda’s dynamic and growing economy. Look, the idea of
somehow being able to help people through just giving them money
isn’t working. That’s why I appreciate the efforts of Rob Mosbacher
and OPIC, recognizing that when you invest in capital — invest
capital, you create jobs. Paternalism has got to be a thing of the past.
Joint venturing with good, capable people is what the future is all
about.
But in the long run, the best way to lift lives in Africa is to tear
————
546

down barriers to investment and trade around the world. And we
have an opportunity to do that through the Doha Round of trade
talks. Look, Doha is important to enhance trade, but if you’re
truly interested in eliminating poverty, we ought to be reducing
tariffs and barriers all across the globe. The United States stands
ready to cut farm subsidies, and agricultural tariffs, and other trade
barriers that disadvantage developing countries. On the other hand,
we expect the rest of the world — especially the most advanced
developing countries —to do the same. And if we both make goodfaith efforts, we can reach a successful Doha agreement this year.
Secondly, we’re working to empower Africans to alleviate
hunger, expand education, and fight disease. America is proud to be
the world’s largest provider of food assistance, including emergency
food stocks that have saved lives in places like Ethiopia, or Sudan,
and other African nations. It’s a noble effort on our people’s part. I
don’t know if — most Americans don’t understand that we’re the
world’s largest provider of food to feed the hungry, but we are.
Yet our ultimate objective is to do more than respond to the
hungry — it is to help African countries feed their own people. So I
have proposed that America purchase crops directly from farmers in
Africa, instead of just shipping food assistance from the developed
world. This initiative would build up local agriculture markets.
It would help break the cycle of famine. And it deserves the full
support of the United States Congress.
We’re also focusing on education. I’m looking forward to
seeing the President of Tanzania, he’s a good guy. Here’s what
he said; he said “It’s an indisputable fact that education is key
to development.” Across Africa, students are eager to learn, and
often they lack quality teachers and just basic supplies. Things
we take for granted in America are just lacking in parts of Africa.
So in 2002, I launched the Africa Education Initiative, the goal of
which is to distribute more than 15 million textbooks, train nearly
a million teachers, and provide scholarships for 550,000 girls by
2010. And we’re headed to achieving that goal. In other words,
these just weren’t empty words, these were concrete, solid goals,
————
547

being funded as a result of the generosity of the Congress and the
American people.
Last year, I also announced a new International Education
Initiative, which will help make basic education available to 4 million
people in Ghana, Liberia, and other nations. Laura and I are looking
forward to talking to the leaders of Ghana and Liberia about this
important, transformative initiative. With both these steps, we are
matching the enthusiasm of African educators with the generosity of
our taxpayers — and we believe strongly that this will open up the
door to opportunity for millions. The good news is, so do the leaders
of the countries we’re going to visit.
The greatest threat to Africa is disease. The greatest threat for a
successful Africa is the scourge of HIV/AIDS and malaria. Two out
of every three people afflicted with HIV/AIDS live in sub-Saharan
Africa. The disease is the leading cause of death in the region. Just a
few years ago, there were fears that HIV/AIDS could wipe out much
of the continent’s population, with death rates that would rival the
Black Plague of the Middle Ages.
We responded. We responded with the Emergency Plan for
AIDS Relief. It’s the largest international health initiative in history
to fight a single disease. In 2002, we pledged $15 billion over five
years to support HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment, and care. We
set some clear principles on how that money would be spent. We
put local partners in the lead, because they know their people and
their needs. We opened the funding to faith-based groups — healers
willing to deliver medicine to remote villages by bicycle or on foot.
We stressed the importance of changing behavior, so that fewer
people are infected in the first place.
And the results are striking. When I visited sub-Saharan Africa
five years ago, or when we visited five years ago, 50,000 people were
receiving medicine to treat HIV/AIDS. And when we return this
week, there will be more than 1.3 million. One person who knows
the benefits of the Emergency Plan is Tatu Msangi. She’s a single
mother from Tanzania. When she became pregnant, Tatu went to a
clinic run by a Christian group. Souls showing up to love a neighbor
————
548

just like they’d like to be loved themselves. You know, it didn’t
take a federal law to say, go to Africa to provide love for Tatu, it
took a higher calling. These goals responded.
She learned she was HIV-positive, and enrolled in a program
designed to prevent mother-to-child transmission. She went on to
deliver a healthy, HIV-free girl, named Faith. I will see Tatu next
week in Tanzania, but it’s not going to be the first time I met her.
See, a few weeks ago, she and Faith endured a rather windy State
of the Union address. She sat with Laura in the box, here in the
capital of the nation that helped save their lives.
In all, the Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief has benefited tens
of millions in Africa. Some call this a remarkable success. I call
it a good start. Last May, I proposed to double our nation’s initial
pledge, to $30 billion over the next five years. The people on the
continent of Africa have to know they’re not alone. The G8 has
shown leadership by agreeing to match our $30 billion pledge.
The private sector has made generous contributions as well. Think
of what Warner Brothers has done, for example. And now the time
has come for Congress to act. Members of both parties should
reauthorize the Emergency Plan, maintain the principles that
have made it a success, and double our commitment to this noble
cause.
Malaria is another devastating killer. In some African
countries, malaria takes as many lives as HIV/AIDS. And the
vast majority of those taken by malaria are children under the
age of five. Every one of these deaths is unnecessary, because
the disease is entirely preventable and treatable. So in 2005,
America launched a five-year, $1.2 billion initiative to provide
the insecticide-treated beds, indoor spraying, cutting-edge drugs
that are necessary to defeat this disease. It’s not a complicated
strategy. It doesn’t take a lot of medical research. We know how
to solve the problem. That’s why I put the Admiral there. He
knows how to solve problems. He can get us from point A to
point B in a straight line. Well, nearly straight line. And so we set
a historic goal — if you have a treatable problem on hand, then
————
549

you’re able to set measurable goals. And the goal is to cut the number
of malaria-related deaths in 15 African nations by half. That’s the
goal.
Like the Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, the malaria initiative
empowers leaders on the ground to design strategies that work best
for their nations. For example, President Yayi of Benin has called
the fight against malaria “a fight against misery.” With the help of
the malaria initiative, he’s leading a campaign to deliver insecticidetreated bed nets to children under five in Benin. I’m looking forward
to hearing how that’s going when we meet him on Benin on our first
stop. I can’t wait to find out how well this initiative is doing.
Like the Emergency Plan, the malaria initiative has been matched
by G8 nations, which have pledged to cut malaria deaths by half in
an additional 15 countries. This initiative has also been greeted with
generous support from the private sector, faith-based groups, and
Americans who want to do something to save somebody’s life. You
can buy a $10 bed net and ship it to Africa to save a life. It doesn’t
take much money, but it takes a big heart. One of the interesting gifts
Laura and I got a couple of years ago for Christmas was bed nets in
our name. It made us feel great.
Like the Emergency Plan, the malaria initiative is producing
undeniable results. In just over two years, the initiative has reached
more than 25 million people. According to new data, malaria rates
are dropping dramatically in many parts of Africa. If we stay on this
path, an extraordinary achievement is within reach — Africa can turn
a disease that has taken its children for centuries into a thing of the
past. And wouldn’t that be fantastic? And so Laura and I are going to
spend time with these leaders, saying, what a noble opportunity; what
a great goal; what a great way to serve humankind.
Finally, we’re working to empower Africans to end conflicts,
strengthen democracy, and promote peace. When I took office, Africa
was home to six major conflicts — in Angola, Burundi, Congo,
Liberia, Sierra Leone, and southern Sudan. We concluded that the
best way to broker peace was to support the efforts of African leaders
on the ground, instead of dictating solutions from Washington, D.C.
————
550

And today, every one of them has made progress toward peace
and stability.
For example, the United States worked closely with Nigeria
to help end the Liberian civil war. When the international
community called for Charles Taylor to step down in 2003,
the President of Nigeria provided a plane to take him in exile.
When U.S. Marines deployed to Liberia, Nigerian peacekeepers
deployed at the same time. And today, Liberia’s long war is over.
And next week in Monrovia, Laura and I will meet with Africa’s
first democratically-elected woman President: Ellen Johnson
Sirleaf.
Even without major conflict or civil war, security challenges
remain in Africa, and we’re working closely with local partners
to address them. The Department of Defense has established a
new African Command, which will work closely with African
governments to crack down on human trafficking, piracy, and
terrorism across the continent. We are employing diplomatic tools
as well. In Eastern Congo, we worked with leaders on the ground
to broker the recent agreements to demobilize all remaining armed
groups. And we stand ready to help all sides to implement them.
In Kenya, we are backing the efforts of former U.N. Secretary
General Kofi Annan to end the crisis.
And when we’re on the continent I’ve asked Condi Rice —
that would be Secretary Rice — to travel to Kenya to support
the work of the former Secretary General, and to deliver a
message directly to Kenya’s leaders and people: There must be an
immediate halt to violence, there must be justice for the victims of
abuse, and there must be a full return to democracy.
In Darfur, the United States will continue to call the killing
what it is - genocide. We will continue to deliver humanitarian
aid. We will continue to enforce sanctions, tough sanctions,
against the Sudanese government officials, rebel leaders, and
others responsible for violence. We expect other nations to join us
in this effort to save lives from the genocide that is taking place.
We will use all our diplomatic resources to urge full deployment
————
551

of an effective United Nations force. The decision was made to
count on the United Nations to provide the force necessary to protect
people, and so we’re going to support their efforts. I must confess,
I’m a little frustrated by how slow things are moving. And yet we
will support their efforts to find forces necessary to make a robust
contribution to save lives.
On this trip, I’m going to visit with brave peacekeepers from
Rwanda, a nation that knows the pain of genocide and was the first
country to send troops into Darfur. Other nations need to follow
Rwanda’s example. Other nations need to take this issue seriously,
just like the United States does, and provide more manpower for this
urgent mission. And when they do, I pledge America will provide
the training and equipment necessary to deploy the peacekeepers to
Darfur.
America also stands with all in Africa who live in the quiet pain
of tyranny. We will confront tyranny. In Zimbabwe, a discredited
dictator presides over food shortages, staggering inflation, and harsh
repression. The decent and talented people of that country deserve
much better. America will continue to support freedom in Zimbabwe.
And I urge neighbors in the region, including South Africa, to do the
same. We look forward to the hour when this nightmare is over, and
the people of Zimbabwe regain their freedom.
These are great challenges, but there is even greater cause for
hope. In the past four years alone, there have been more than 50
democratic elections in Africa. Thriving free societies have emerged
in nations with Islamic majorities, Christian majorities, majorities
of other beliefs — which is a powerful rebuke to the ideology of
the extremists. In many nations, women have exercised the right to
vote and run for office. Rwanda now has the highest percentage of
female legislators in the world. Overall, more than two-thirds of the
nations of sub-Saharan Africa are free. And for the rest, the direction
of history is clear, so long as the United States does not lose its nerve,
and retreat into isolationism and protectionism. The day will come
when a region once dismissed as the “dark continent” enjoys the light
of liberty.
————
552

The United States must remain fully committed to the new era
of development that we have begun with our partners in Africa. It’s
in our national interest we do so. I’m going to work closely with
the G8 nations to ensure they keep their promises as well. Congress
must continue to show its commitment by fully funding the
development programs I described today. You see, saving lives is a
calling that crosses partisan lines. It remains equally worthy in both
good economic times and times of economic uncertainty.
Across Africa, people have begun to speak of the “Lazarus
effect,” where communities once given up for dead are coming
back to life. This work of healing and redemption is both a matter
of conscience and a wise exercise of American influence. The work
is not done. In the face of the needs that remain, it’s important for
the African people to believe the American people are not going
to turn away. That’s part of the purpose of our trip. The changes
taking place in Africa don’t always make the headlines. So don’t
be frustrated, Mark. That means the work is quiet, but it is not
thankless.
Last November, I met a woman from Zambia named Bridget
Chisenga. Bridget’s husband died of AIDS, and she expected to
meet the same fate. Then she went to a clinic operated by Catholic
Relief Services, funded by the American people. Today, Bridget is
healthy. She has a job at the clinic, where she helps provide AIDS
medicine to others. I want our fellow citizens to hear what she said:
“This face is alive and vibrant because of your initiative. I would
like to thank you.”
Americans have heard similar words of gratitude and hope
in the past. They were said about the people who liberated the
concentration camps, and saved the blockaded city of Berlin, and
stood firm until the prisoners in the gulags were set free. This spirit
of purpose and compassion has always defined America. And that
is why the people of Africa can be certain they will always have a
friend and partner in the United States of America.
God bless.


Holy Father, Laura and I are privileged to have you here at
the White House. We welcome you with the ancient words
commended by Saint Augustine: “Pax Tecum.” Peace be with you.
You’ve chosen to visit America on your birthday. Well,
birthdays are traditionally spent with close friends, so our entire
nation is moved and honored that you’ve decided to share this
special day with us. We wish you much health and happiness —
today and for many years to come.
This is your first trip to the United States since you ascended
to the Chair of Saint Peter. You will visit two of our greatest cities
and meet countless Americans, including many who have traveled
from across the country to see with you and to share in the joy
of this visit. Here in America you’ll find a nation of prayer. Each
day millions of our citizens approach our Maker on bended knee,
seeking His grace and giving thanks for the many blessings He
bestows upon us. Millions of Americans have been praying for your
visit, and millions look forward to praying with you this week.
Here in America you’ll find a nation of compassion. Americans
believe that the measure of a free society is how we treat the
weakest and most vulnerable among us. So each day citizens across
America answer the universal call to feed the hungry and comfort
the sick and care for the infirm. Each day across the world the
United States is working to eradicate disease, alleviate poverty,
promote peace and bring the light of hope to places still mired in the
darkness of tyranny and despair.
Here in America you’ll find a nation that welcomes the role of
faith in the public square. When our Founders declared our nation’s
independence, they rested their case on an appeal to the “laws of
————
555

nature, and of nature’s God.” We believe in religious liberty. We also
believe that a love for freedom and a common moral law are written
into every human heart, and that these constitute the firm foundation
on which any successful free society must be built.
Here in America, you’ll find a nation that is fully modern, yet
guided by ancient and eternal truths. The United States is the most
innovative, creative and dynamic country on earth — it is also
among the most religious. In our nation, faith and reason coexist in
harmony. This is one of our country’s greatest strengths, and one of
the reasons that our land remains a beacon of hope and opportunity
for millions across the world.
Most of all, Holy Father, you will find in America people whose
hearts are open to your message of hope. And America and the world
need this message. In a world where some invoke the name of God
to justify acts of terror and murder and hate, we need your message
that “God is love.” And embracing this love is the surest way to save
men from “falling prey to the teaching of fanaticism and terrorism.”
In a world where some treat life as something to be debased
and discarded, we need your message that all human life is sacred,
and that “each of us is willed, each of us is loved, and each of us is
necessary.”
In a world where some no longer believe that we can distinguish
between simple right and wrong, we need your message to reject
this “dictatorship of relativism,” and embrace a culture of justice and
truth.
In a world where some see freedom as simply the right to do
as they wish, we need your message that true liberty requires us to
live our freedom not just for ourselves, but “in a spirit of mutual
support.”
Holy Father, thank you for making this journey to America. Our
nation welcomes you. We appreciate the example you set for the
world, and we ask that you always keep us in your prayers.

President Peres and Mr. Prime Minister, Madam Speaker, thank
very much for hosting this special session. President Beinish,
Leader of the Opposition Netanyahu, Ministers, members of the
Knesset, distinguished guests: Shalom. Laura and I are thrilled to be
back in Israel. We have been deeply moved by the celebrations of
the past two days. And this afternoon, I am honored to stand before
one of the world’s great democratic assemblies and convey the
wishes of the American people with these words: Yom Ha’atzmaut
Sameach.
It is a rare privilege for the American President to speak to the
Knesset. Although the Prime Minister told me there is something
even rarer — to have just one person in this chamber speaking at a
time. My only regret is that one of Israel’s greatest leaders is not
here to share this moment. He is a warrior for the ages, a man of
peace, a friend. The prayers of the American people are with Ariel
Sharon.
We gather to mark a momentous occasion. Sixty years ago in
Tel Aviv, David Ben-Gurion proclaimed Israel’s independence,
founded on the “natural right of the Jewish people to be masters of
their own fate.” What followed was more than the establishment of
a new country. It was the redemption of an ancient promise given
to Abraham and Moses and David — a homeland for the chosen
people Eretz Yisrael.
Eleven minutes later, on the orders of President Harry Truman,
the United States was proud to be the first nation to recognize
Israel’s independence. And on this landmark anniversary, America
is proud to be Israel’s closest ally and best friend in the world.
The alliance between our governments is unbreakable, yet the
source of our friendship runs deeper than any treaty. It is grounded
————
557

in the shared spirit of our people, the bonds of the Book, the ties of
the soul. When William Bradford stepped off the Mayflower in 1620,
he quoted the words of Jeremiah: “Come let us declare in Zion the
word of God.” The founders of my country saw a new promised
land and bestowed upon their towns names like Bethlehem and New
Canaan. And in time, many Americans became passionate advocates
for a Jewish state.
Centuries of suffering and sacrifice would pass before the dream
was fulfilled. The Jewish people endured the agony of the pogroms,
the tragedy of the Great War, and the horror of the Holocaust —
what Elie Wiesel called “the kingdom of the night.” Soulless men
took away lives and broke apart families. Yet they could not take
away the spirit of the Jewish people, and they could not break the
promise of God. When news of Israel’s freedom finally arrived,
Golda Meir, a fearless woman raised in Wisconsin, could summon
only tears. She later said: “For two thousand years we have waited
for our deliverance. Now that it is here it is so great and wonderful
that it surpasses human words.”
The joy of independence was tempered by the outbreak of
battle, a struggle that has continued for six decades. Yet in spite of
the violence, in defiance of the threats, Israel has built a thriving
democracy in the heart of the Holy Land. You have welcomed
immigrants from the four corners of the Earth. You have forged a
free and modern society based on the love of liberty, a passion for
justice, and a respect for human dignity. You have worked tirelessly
for peace. You have fought valiantly for freedom.
My country’s admiration for Israel does not end there. When
Americans look at Israel, we see a pioneer spirit that worked an
agricultural miracle and now leads a high-tech revolution. We
see world-class universities and a global leader in business and
innovation and the arts. We see a resource more valuable than oil or
gold: the talent and determination of a free people who refuse to let
any obstacle stand in the way of their destiny.
I have been fortunate to see the character of Israel up close. I
have touched the Western Wall, seen the sun reflected in the Sea of
————
558

Galilee, I have prayed at Yad Vashem. And earlier today, I visited
Masada, an inspiring monument to courage and sacrifice. At this
historic site, Israeli soldiers swear an oath: “Masada shall never
fall again.” Citizens of Israel: Masada shall never fall again, and
America will be at your side.
This anniversary is a time to reflect on the past. It’s also an
opportunity to look to the future. As we go forward, our alliance will
be guided by clear principles — shared convictions rooted in moral
clarity and unswayed by popularity polls or the shifting opinions of
international elites.
We believe in the matchless value of every man, woman,
and child. So we insist that the people of Israel have the right to a
decent, normal, and peaceful life, just like the citizens of every other
nation.
We believe that democracy is the only way to ensure human
rights. So we consider it a source of shame that the United Nations
routinely passes more human rights resolutions against the freest
democracy in the Middle East than any other nation in the world.
We believe that religious liberty is fundamental to a civilized
society. So we condemn anti-Semitism in all forms — whether by
those who openly question Israel’s right to exist, or by others who
quietly excuse them.
We believe that free people should strive and sacrifice for peace.
So we applaud the courageous choices Israeli’s leaders have made.
We also believe that nations have a right to defend themselves and
that no nation should ever be forced to negotiate with killers pledged
to its destruction.
We believe that targeting innocent lives to achieve political
objectives is always and everywhere wrong. So we stand together
against terror and extremism, and we will never let down our guard
or lose our resolve.
The fight against terror and extremism is the defining challenge
of our time. It is more than a clash of arms. It is a clash of visions, a
great ideological struggle. On the one side are those who defend the
ideals of justice and dignity with the power of reason and truth. On
————
559

the other side are those who pursue a narrow vision of cruelty and
control by committing murder, inciting fear, and spreading lies.
This struggle is waged with the technology of the 21st century,
but at its core it is an ancient battle between good and evil. The
killers claim the mantle of Islam, but they are not religious men. No
one who prays to the God of Abraham could strap a suicide vest to
an innocent child, or blow up guiltless guests at a Passover Seder,
or fly planes into office buildings filled with unsuspecting workers.
In truth, the men who carry out these savage acts serve no higher
goal than their own desire for power. They accept no God before
themselves. And they reserve a special hatred for the most ardent
defenders of liberty, including Americans and Israelis.
And that is why the founding charter of Hamas calls for the
“elimination” of Israel. And that is why the followers of Hezbollah
chant “Death to Israel, Death to America!” That is why Osama bin
Laden teaches that “the killing of Jews and Americans is one of
the biggest duties.” And that is why the President of Iran dreams of
returning the Middle East to the Middle Ages and calls for Israel to
be wiped off the map.
There are good and decent people who cannot fathom the
darkness in these men and try to explain away their words. It’s
natural, but it is deadly wrong. As witnesses to evil in the past, we
carry a solemn responsibility to take these words seriously. Jews and
Americans have seen the consequences of disregarding the words of
leaders who espouse hatred. And that is a mistake the world must not
repeat in the 21st century.
Some seem to believe that we should negotiate with the terrorists
and radicals, as if some ingenious argument will persuade them
they have been wrong all along. We have heard this foolish delusion
before. As Nazi tanks crossed into Poland in 1939, an American
senator declared: “Lord, if I could only have talked to Hitler, all this
might have been avoided.” We have an obligation to call this what it
is — the false comfort of appeasement, which has been repeatedly
discredited by history.
Some people suggest if the United States would just break ties
————
560

with Israel, all our problems in the Middle East would go away. This
is a tired argument that buys into the propaganda of the enemies of
peace, and America utterly rejects it. Israel’s population may be just
over 7 million. But when you confront terror and evil, you are 307
million strong, because the United States of America stands with you.
America stands with you in breaking up terrorist networks and
denying the extremists sanctuary. America stands with you in firmly
opposing Iran’s nuclear weapons ambitions. Permitting the world’s
leading sponsor of terror to possess the world’s deadliest weapons
would be an unforgivable betrayal for future generations. For the
sake of peace, the world must not allow Iran to have a nuclear
weapon.
Ultimately, to prevail in this struggle, we must offer an
alternative to the ideology of the extremists by extending our vision
of justice and tolerance and freedom and hope. These values are
the self-evident right of all people, of all religions, in all the world
because they are a gift from the Almighty God. Securing these rights
is also the surest way to secure peace. Leaders who are accountable
to their people will not pursue endless confrontation and bloodshed.
Young people with a place in their society and a voice in their future
are less likely to search for meaning in radicalism. Societies where
citizens can express their conscience and worship their God will not
export violence, they will be partners in peace.
The fundamental insight, that freedom yields peace, is the great
lesson of the 20th century. Now our task is to apply it to the 21st.
Nowhere is this work more urgent than here in the Middle East.
We must stand with the reformers working to break the old patterns
of tyranny and despair. We must give voice to millions of ordinary
people who dream of a better life in a free society. We must confront
the moral relativism that views all forms of government as equally
acceptable and thereby consigns whole societies to slavery. Above
all, we must have faith in our values and ourselves and confidently
pursue the expansion of liberty as the path to a peaceful future.
That future will be a dramatic departure from the Middle East
of today. So as we mark 60 years from Israel’s founding, let us try to
————
561

envision the region 60 years from now. This vision is not going to
arrive easily or overnight; it will encounter violent resistance. But if
we and future Presidents and future Knessets maintain our resolve
and have faith in our ideals, here is the Middle East that we can see:
Israel will be celebrating the 120th anniversary as one of the
world’s great democracies, a secure and flourishing homeland for
the Jewish people. The Palestinian people will have the homeland
they have long dreamed of and deserved — a democratic state that is
governed by law, and respects human rights, and rejects terror. From
Cairo to Riyadh to Baghdad and Beirut, people will live in free and
independent societies, where a desire for peace is reinforced by ties
of diplomacy and tourism and trade. Iran and Syria will be peaceful
nations, with today’s oppression a distant memory and where people
are free to speak their minds and develop their God-given talents.
Al Qaeda and Hezbollah and Hamas will be defeated, as Muslims
across the region recognize the emptiness of the terrorists’ vision
and the injustice of their cause.
Overall, the Middle East will be characterized by a new
period of tolerance and integration. And this doesn’t mean that Israel
and its neighbors will be best of friends. But when leaders across
the region answer to their people, they will focus their energies
on schools and jobs, not on rocket attacks and suicide bombings.
With this change, Israel will open a new hopeful chapter in which
its people can live a normal life, and the dream of Herzl and the
founders of 1948 can be fully and finally realized.
This is a bold vision, and some will say it can never be achieved.
But think about what we have witnessed in our own time. When
Europe was destroying itself through total war and genocide, it was
difficult to envision a continent that six decades later would be free
and at peace. When Japanese pilots were flying suicide missions into
American battleships, it seemed impossible that six decades later
Japan would be a democracy, a lynchpin of security in Asia, and one
of America’s closest friends. And when waves of refugees arrived
here in the desert with nothing, surrounded by hostile armies, it was
almost unimaginable that Israel would grow into one of the freest
————
562

and most successful nations on the earth.
Yet each one of these transformations took place. And a future
of transformation is possible in the Middle East, so long as a new
generation of leaders has the courage to defeat the enemies of
freedom, to make the hard choices necessary for peace, and stand
firm on the solid rock of universal values.
Sixty years ago, on the eve of Israel’s independence, the last
British soldiers departing Jerusalem stopped at a building in the
Jewish quarter of the Old City. An officer knocked on the door
and met a senior rabbi. The officer presented him with a short iron
bar — the key to the Zion Gate — and said it was the first time in
18 centuries that a key to the gates of Jerusalem had belonged to a
Jew. His hands trembling, the rabbi offered a prayer of thanksgiving
to God, “Who had granted us life and permitted us to reach this
day.” Then he turned to the officer, and uttered the words Jews had
awaited for so long: “I accept this key in the name of my people.”
Over the past six decades, the Jewish people have established a
state that would make that humble rabbi proud. You have raised a
modern society in the Promised Land, a light unto the nations that
preserves the legacy of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob. And you have
built a mighty democracy that will endure forever and can always
count on the United States of America to be at your side. God bless.

Thank you, all. Please be seated. Welcome to the South Ground
of the White House. It is a joy to be here with members of the
armies of compassion. I’m really glad you’re here and I appreciate
your inspiration to our fellow citizens. I believe you are a constant
reminder of the true source of our nation’s strength, which is the
good hearts and souls of the American people.
We have seen the good hearts of our people over the last week
as caring volunteers have helped their fellow citizens through
Hurricane Gustav and Tropical Storm Hanna. The Red Cross,
which provides a vital role in helping the relief efforts and recovery
efforts, has been spending millions of dollars to provide shelter
and food for evacuees and to help with the clean-up efforts. Yet
charitable contributions have not kept pace with their expenses, and
I hope our fellow citizens will support the Red Cross, particularly
as Hurricane Ike and other storms develop over the Gulf Coast.
You can help by going to the Red Cross’s website — redcross.
org — and make a vital contribution to help our fellow citizens.
I appreciate the fact that those here represent the hundreds of
thousands of our citizens who answered the call to love a neighbor
like we’d like to be loved ourselves.
I appreciate the fact that you and others lift up souls, one
person at a time. You strengthen the foundation of our democracy,
which is the engagement of our people. I want to thank you for
what you do. God bless you and welcome.
I thank Secretary Dirk Kempthorne, Department of
the Interior, and Patricia, who have joined us; Secretary of
Commerce, Carlos Gutierrez; Secretary of Transportation, Mary
Peters; Congresswoman Carolyn McCarthy, welcome Madame
Congresswoman, thanks for coming. I appreciate Stephen
————
565

Goldsmith, the Chairman of the Corporation for National and
Community Service; Jack Hawkins, Director of Volunteers for
Prosperity; Ron Tschetter, who is the Director of the Peace Corps —
I knew that was coming. Jean Case, the Chairman of the President’s
Council on Service and Civic Participation and members of that
council.
I appreciate my buddy, Michael W. Smith, who is going to play
a couple of songs for us here. And his wife, Debbie. I want to thank
student and school administrators and board members from the
LEAGUE that are here today. These are students from schools all
across the country. We are glad you are here.
With us is the 2007 Spirit of Hope Award Recipient. This is
the military’s way of honoring people who have given back to their
communities. Giovanni Balingit — Giovanni, welcome; thank you,
sir; congratulations to you. I want to thank all those who are here in
the United States military. Thank you for wearing the uniform of the
United States.
But most of all, thanks for coming. I really appreciate you taking
time out to come by and let me say hello to you.
In my first inaugural address, I challenged all Americans
to be “citizens, not spectators ... responsible citizens, building
communities of service and a nation of character.”
Eight months later Americans were tested by the worst attack
on our nation. In the midst of chaos and sorrow, Americans
responded with the — with characteristic courage and grace. It was
a remarkable moment in our country. It really was, when you think
about it. Rescue workers wrote their Social Security numbers on
their arms and then rushed into buildings. Citizens became members
of ambulance teams. And people from all across the country poured
into New York City to help. The terrorists who attacked our country
on September the 11th didn’t understand our country at all. Evil may
crush concrete and twist steel, but it can never break the spirit of the
American people.
In the weeks and months after the attacks, inspiring acts
continued to unfold all across the country. I’m sure you heard
————
566

the stories, just like I did. Men and women of our armed forces
accepted dangerous new duties, and a lot of folks stepped forward
to volunteer to protect our fellow citizens. But the desire to serve
reached far beyond the military. Millions of Americans were —
really wanted to help our country recover.
And so to tap into that spirit, I called on every American to
spend at least 4,000 hours — or two years in the course of a lifetime
— to serve our nation through acts of compassion. Some said that’s
acting — asking a lot for the country, and they were right — and
they were right. Two years during a lifetime is a lot to give. But the
truth of the matter is, citizens who do give realize that they become
enriched just like those folks that they’re helping.
To empower Americans looking to help, we launched what’s
called the USA Freedom Corps. The goal of the USA Freedom
Corps was to connect Americans with opportunities to serve our
country, to foster a culture of citizenship and responsibility and
service. Over the last six years, USA Freedom Corps has met these
goals.
One way we helped was to launch a web site called volunteer.
gov, which is the largest clearinghouse of volunteer opportunities in
America. In other words, we used high-tech innovations to be able
to channel people’s desire to serve in a constructive way.
And so this government website directs people to private
charities, or local churches, or Habitat for Humanity drives, or
Meals on Wheels — just opportunities to serve their neighbor.
We can’t put love in somebody’s heart, but we certainly can help
somebody channel their love. And that was the purpose of the
website.
And you can search my hometown. They tell me that if you get
on Crawford, Texas, you’ll find that the local Humane Society seeks
volunteer pet groomers — which makes Barney really nervous.
This is just one of 4 million volunteer opportunities on the USA
Freedom Corps web site. Isn’t that interesting? There are 4 million
opportunities for somebody who wants to serve to say, here’s how I
can help. And so I urge our fellow citizens to go to the website and
————
567

find out if there’s not something that’ll interest you, something that’ll
give you a chance to serve something greater than yourself.
USA Freedom Corps fosters a culture of service by encouraging
the private sector to step forward. We got what we call the pro bono
challenge, which encourages corporate professionals to donate
their services to charities and nonprofits. That makes a lot of sense,
doesn’t it, to encourage corporate America to not only serve their
shareholders, but serve the communities in which they exist.
One really interesting, innovative idea came out of IBM this
year. IBM employees will donate millions of dollars of service to
charities in the U.S., as well as technology projects in developing
nations. They tell me that this work would cost $250 million if
IBM’s devoted employees were charging, and not providing for
free. I want to thank the CEO of IBM, Sam Palmisano, who is with
us today. Sam, thank you very much for coming. And I encourage
corporate America to figure out ways that they can serve to make
America a better place.
Another key component of USA Freedom Corps is our effort
to keep track of Americans' service to others. I mean, it's one thing
to talk about it, it's another thing to measure, to kind of see how
we're doing. In 2002, this administration became the first to conduct
a regular survey of volunteerism through the U.S. Census Bureau.
Because we've begun to measure, we know that nearly 61 million
Americans now give their time to help their neighbors. Isn't that
interesting? Sixty-one million of our fellow citizens volunteer.
We've also launched new national programs and enhanced
others to help our citizens answer the call to service. For example,
we helped Americans answer the call by creating the Citizen Corps.
Sounds like quite a few members have shown up. And we are glad
you're here.
For those of you who don't know what the Citizen Corps is,
it's a way for people to volunteer to help respond to disasters. This
was set up right after September the 11th. Americans have formed
community emergency response teams -- there you go -- fire corps,
medical reserve corps, neighborhood watch groups. Today there are
————
568

nearly 1 million Citizen Corps volunteers nationwide.
And one of those volunteers is County Judge Ed Emmett
from Harris County, Texas. So let me tell you about what the
Citizen Corps of Harris County did. So Katrina hits, there's about
200,000 Gulf Coast residents headed into the Houston area. The
Citizen Corps showed up. Volunteers came to process evacuees,
to help treat the ill and injured, and to help settle storm victims in
permanent housing.
Here's what Ed said -- I've known him for a long time, by the
way -- the Judge said, "That's just what members of the Citizen
Corps do -- they take care of their neighbors." And Judge, I want to
thank you, and all of the members of the Citizen Corps nationwide
for taking care of your neighbors.
We've helped Americans answer the call by creating a program
called Volunteers for Prosperity. This initiative matched skilled
American professionals with service opportunities -- a lot of them
in the developing world. This year we mobilized more than 43,000
doctors, teachers, engineers and other skilled volunteers. That's
a pretty good start for an important program, it seems like to me.
These men and women save babies from malaria on the continent of
Africa. They bring modern information technology to Afghanistan.
They live out one of America's strongest beliefs -- that to whom
much is given, much is required.
One of those people who is a member of this important team
is Zach Harvey. He serves on the prosthetics staff at Walter Reed
Army Medical Center. When he isn’t — (applause) — let me finish
with old Zach. When he isn’t busy helping our wounded warriors,
he’s putting his skills to use in Guatemala and the Dominican
Republic as a Volunteer for Prosperity. He works with pediatric
cancer patients who’ve had a limb amputated as part of their
treatment. He and his team of volunteers fit the children with new
limbs and they pass on their skills to other care-givers.
He says the only payment he receives is the pride that comes
with children — seeing children walk again. And Zach, we are
proud to have you here and thank you for your service. (Applause.)
————
569

Zach doesn’t want anybody to look at him, but you can’t help it
when you’re that kind of kind man. Appreciate it.
By the way, both the Citizen Corps and Volunteers for
Prosperity have been very effective programs. And I really believe
Congress needs to make these good programs permanent.
We’ve also helped answer the call to service by strengthening
AmeriCorps. This is a program that matches dedicated volunteers
with hundreds of private charitable institutions. AmeriCorps
members sign up for one-year commitments with the idea of
strengthening their communities by teaching adults how to read or
improving health care or helping the homeless put a roof over their
heads. This is a good program that was started by my predecessor,
President Clinton.
After 9/11, we tried to make this program more effective — in
other words, to help the dollars allocated go further. Today, more
than 74,000 people serve their fellow citizens through AmeriCorps.
I have met AmeriCorps volunteers all over our country and they’re
very inspiring Americans.
One such volunteer is Emily Greene. After college, she enlisted
in the program to serve with the Schools of Hope Literacy Project
in Madison, Wisconsin. Through the Schools of Hope, Emily has
recruited hundreds of volunteers to teach children how to read.
What kind of — what a wonderful gift. When somebody says,
“How can I help serve America,” how about teaching a child to read
as a lasting contribution to the future of our country?
Madison’s public elementary schools are improving, thea
chievement gap is narrowing. And Emily, it must make you feel
great to leave a lasting contribution, and we are glad you’re here on
behalf of AmeriCorps. Thanks for coming.
We’ve also helped others serve by expanding the Peace Corps.
So, see, you don’t know what I know — that every time I go to an
embassy overseas and I mention anything about the Peace Corps,
and there happens to be a Peace Corps contingent — they give that
same kind of yell. Peace Corps volunteers are incredibly motivated
people and it’s a fabulous program.
————
570

The number of Peace Corps volunteers has increased. We’ve
reopened 13 — reopened programs in 13 countries. This is a vital
program. There are about 8,000 Peace Corps members that are
fighting AIDS in Africa, training poor workers to start their own
businesses in Latin America, they’re teaching English to children
in Asia. What they’re doing is they’re showing the rest of the world
the compassionate heart of the American citizen. I mean, we are a
compassionate nation and the Peace Corps does a fabulous job of
advancing that compassion.
Praya Baruch is with us today. After college Praya spent two
years in Ghana working with people who are HIV-positive, training
religious leaders to provide community-based care, and educating
young people about HIV preparation. She is now on the staff of
the Peace Corps. She represents the 8,000 people who are on the
front lines of helping people deal with some of the most difficult
problems in the world. Praya, we are honored you’re here and I
want to thank the Peace Corps.
There are other ways to help Americans answer the call to
service. We have got what we call the Faith Based and Community
Initiative through which we’ve empowered Americans to volunteer
through their churches and congregations.
You know, I believe that if a program is successful, government
ought to support it. And I believe if it takes faith to help solve some
of the most intractable problems, government ought not to fear the
influence of faith in our society, we ought to welcome the influence
of faith in our society.
Laura — who is not here, but sends her best wishes —
has rallied thousands of volunteers to help at-risk children
through Helping America’s Youth Initiative. We’ve encouraged
volunteerism by holding up examples of our volunteers. You
know, to date, 1.1 million Americans have received the President’s
Volunteer Service Award. That may not seem like a big deal to
some people, but when you get one and you show it to people
you’re working with, they say, how do I get one of those? What do
I need to do? Well, what you need to do is serve your community by
————
571

volunteering and help make somebody’s life better
Volunteerism is strong in the country. But the truth of the matter
is, the farther we’ve gotten away from 9/11, that memory has begun
to fade. And some are saying, well, maybe I don’t need to volunteer
now. Maybe the crisis has passed. The aftermath of 9/11 isn’t nearly
as intense as it was. And my call to people is, there’s always a need.
You should be volunteering not because of 9/11, but you should be
volunteering because our country needs you on a regular basis.
We can use your help. There are citizens who say, I need love.
Government can pass law, but it cannot put love into somebody’s
heart. Oftentimes that helps when somebody puts their arm around
you and say, how can I help you, brother, or sister? What can I do to
make your life better?
And so today I call upon our fellow citizens to devote 4,000
hours over your lifetime in service to your country. You’ll become a
better person for it, and our society will be more healthy as a result
of it. You know, there’s an old adage that says, you can bring hope
to the lives of others, but the life you enrich the most will probably
be your own.
I’ve witnessed the amazing phenomenon of volunteerism
throughout my travels in this country. At nearly every stop, I make
it a point to meet a local volunteer selected by the USA Freedom
Corps at the steps of Air Force One. After they get over the initial
shock of seeing me come off the plane — I love to ask them what
they’re doing, what are you doing to make your community a better
place?
One such volunteer is a young woman I met in Pittsburgh named
Kristen Holloway. She started a program called Operation Troop
Appreciation. It started off as kind of a small program, just an idea,
a desire to make a statement. Her group collects everything from
DVDs and phone calls — cards to musical instruments and sports
gear. So far, they have sent care packages to more than 40,000
men and women serving in the front lines in this war against the
extremists.
Kristen, we’re glad you’re here. Thank you for — by the
————
572

way, you’re representing a lot of people here in this audience and
around the country who have had — I have the honor of meeting as
volunteers at the foot of Air Force One.
I want to thank you all for showing up when I show up.
Generally, the weather is nice. Sometimes it’s not so nice. But
nevertheless you’re there with your smiling face. And you inspire
me. You really do lift up my spirits to meet people who are so
dedicated that they are willing to take time out of their lives to help
somebody in need. And I hope by getting you on the front page
of your newspapers, that you inspire others to show up and serve
America by volunteering.
But I want to tell you what a soldier wrote to Kristen’s group.
A soldier wrote back after getting one of the packages and said,
“My heart soars with pride to represent a country filled with such
wonderful people as [you].” That was the thank you note that
Kristen’s group got.
Well, my heart soars with pride as well to be in the presence of
those who are lifting up souls and helping mend hearts. I want to
thank you for what you’re doing. I am incredibly optimistic about
the future of our country. And the reason I am is because I’ve seen
firsthand the love and the compassion and the decency of our fellow
citizens.
May God bless you. May God bless the armies of compassion.

Good evening. This is an extraordinary period for America’s
economy. Over the past few weeks, many Americans have felt
anxiety about their finances and their future. I understand their
worry and their frustration. We’ve seen triple-digit swings in the
stock market. Major financial institutions have teetered on the edge
of collapse, and some have failed. As uncertainty has grown, many
banks have restricted lending. Credit markets have frozen. And
families and businesses have found it harder to borrow money.
We’re in the midst of a serious financial crisis, and the federal
government is responding with decisive action. We’ve boosted
confidence in money market mutual funds, and acted to prevent
major investors from intentionally driving down stocks for their
own personal gain.
Most importantly, my administration is working with Congress
to address the root cause behind much of the instability in our
markets. Financial assets related to home mortgages have lost value
during the housing decline. And the banks holding these assets have
restricted credit. As a result, our entire economy is in danger. So
I’ve proposed that the federal government reduce the risk posed
by these troubled assets, and supply urgently-needed money so
banks and other financial institutions can avoid collapse and resume
lending.
This rescue effort is not aimed at preserving any individual
company or industry — it is aimed at preserving America’s overall
economy. It will help American consumers and businesses get credit
to meet their daily needs and create jobs. And it will help send a
signal to markets around the world that America’s financial system
is back on track.
I know many Americans have questions tonight: How did
————
575

we reach this point in our economy? How will the solution I’ve
proposed work? And what does this mean for your financial future?
These are good questions, and they deserve clear answers.
First, how did our economy reach this point?
Well, most economists agree that the problems we are
witnessing today developed over a long period of time. For more
than a decade, a massive amount of money flowed into the United
States from investors abroad, because our country is an attractive
and secure place to do business. This large influx of money to U.S.
banks and financial institutions — along with low interest rates
— made it easier for Americans to get credit. These developments
allowed more families to borrow money for cars and homes and
college tuition — some for the first time. They allowed more
entrepreneurs to get loans to start new businesses and create jobs.
Unfortunately, there were also some serious negative
consequences, particularly in the housing market. Easy credit —
combined with the faulty assumption that home values would
continue to rise — led to excesses and bad decisions. Many
mortgage lenders approved loans for borrowers without carefully
examining their ability to pay. Many borrowers took out loans larger
than they could afford, assuming that they could sell or refinance
their homes at a higher price later on.
Optimism about housing values also led to a boom in home
construction. Eventually the number of new houses exceeded the
number of people willing to buy them. And with supply exceeding
demand, housing prices fell. And this created a problem: Borrowers
with adjustable rate mortgages who had been planning to sell or
refinance their homes at a higher price were stuck with homes worth
less than expected — along with mortgage payments they could not
afford. As a result, many mortgage holders began to default.
These widespread defaults had effects far beyond the housing
market. See, in today’s mortgage industry, home loans are often
packaged together, and converted into financial products called
“mortgage-backed securities.” These securities were sold to
investors around the world. Many investors assumed these securities
————
576

were trustworthy, and asked few questions about their actual value.
Two of the leading purchasers of mortgage-backed securities were
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Because these companies were
chartered by Congress, many believed they were guaranteed by the
federal government. This allowed them to borrow enormous sums
of money, fuel the market for questionable investments, and put our
financial system at risk.
The decline in the housing market set off a domino effect across
our economy. When home values declined, borrowers defaulted on
their mortgages, and investors holding mortgage-backed securities
began to incur serious losses. Before long, these securities became
so unreliable that they were not being bought or sold. Investment
banks such as Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers found themselves
saddled with large amounts of assets they could not sell. They
ran out of the money needed to meet their immediate obligations.
And they faced imminent collapse. Other banks found themselves
in severe financial trouble. These banks began holding on to their
money, and lending dried up, and the gears of the American financial
system began grinding to a halt.
With the situation becoming more precarious by the day, I faced
a choice: To step in with dramatic government action, or to stand
back and allow the irresponsible actions of some to undermine the
financial security of all.
I’m a strong believer in free enterprise. So my natural instinct is
to oppose government intervention. I believe companies that make
bad decisions should be allowed to go out of business. Under normal
circumstances, I would have followed this course. But these are
not normal circumstances. The market is not functioning properly.
There’s been a widespread loss of confidence. And major sectors of
America’s financial system are at risk of shutting down.
The government’s top economic experts warn that without
immediate action by Congress, America could slip into a financial
panic, and a distressing scenario would unfold:
More banks could fail, including some in your community. The
stock market would drop even more, which would reduce the value
————
577

of your retirement account. The value of your home could plummet.
Foreclosures would rise dramatically. And if you own a business or
a farm, you would find it harder and more expensive to get credit.
More businesses would close their doors, and millions of Americans
could lose their jobs. Even if you have good credit history, it would
be more difficult for you to get the loans you need to buy a car or
send your children to college. And ultimately, our country could
experience a long and painful recession.
Fellow citizens: We must not let this happen. I appreciate the
work of leaders from both parties in both houses of Congress to
address this problem — and to make improvements to the proposal
my administration sent to them. There is a spirit of cooperation
between Democrats and Republicans, and between Congress and
this administration. In that spirit, I’ve invited Senators McCain and
Obama to join congressional leaders of both parties at the White
House tomorrow to help speed our discussions toward a bipartisan
bill.
I know that an economic rescue package will present a tough
vote for many members of Congress. It is difficult to pass a bill
that commits so much of the taxpayers’ hard-earned money. I also
understand the frustration of responsible Americans who pay their
mortgages on time, file their tax returns every April 15th, and are
reluctant to pay the cost of excesses on Wall Street. But given the
situation we are facing, not passing a bill now would cost these
Americans much more later.
Many Americans are asking: How would a rescue plan work?
After much discussion, there is now widespread agreement
on the principles such a plan would include. It would remove the
risk posed by the troubled assets — including mortgage-backed
securities — now clogging the financial system. This would
free banks to resume the flow of credit to American families and
businesses. Any rescue plan should also be designed to ensure that
taxpayers are protected. It should welcome the participation of
financial institutions large and small. It should make certain that
failed executives do not receive a windfall from your tax dollars.
————
578

It should establish a bipartisan board to oversee the plan’s
implementation. And it should be enacted as soon as possible.
In close consultation with Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson,
Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, and SEC Chairman
Chris Cox, I announced a plan on Friday. First, the plan is
big enough to solve a serious problem. Under our proposal,
the federal government would put up to $700 billion taxpayer
dollars on the line to purchase troubled assets that are clogging
the financial system. In the short term, this will free up banks to
resume the flow of credit to American families and businesses.
And this will help our economy grow.
Second, as markets have lost confidence in mortgage-backed
securities, their prices have dropped sharply. Yet the value of
many of these assets will likely be higher than their current price,
because the vast majority of Americans will ultimately pay off
their mortgages. The government is the one institution with the
patience and resources to buy these assets at their current low
prices and hold them until markets return to normal. And when
that happens, money will flow back to the Treasury as these assets
are sold. And we expect that much, if not all, of the tax dollars we
invest will be paid back.
A final question is: What does this mean for your economic
future?
The primary steps — purpose of the steps I have outlined
tonight is to safeguard the financial security of American workers
and families and small businesses. The federal government also
continues to enforce laws and regulations protecting your money.
The Treasury Department recently offered government insurance
for money market mutual funds. And through the FDIC, every
savings account, checking account, and certificate of deposit is
insured by the federal government for up to $100,000. The FDIC
has been in existence for 75 years, and no one has ever lost a
penny on an insured deposit — and this will not change.
Once this crisis is resolved, there will be time to update our
financial regulatory structures. Our 21st century global economy
————
579

remains regulated largely by outdated 20th century laws. Recently,
we’ve seen how one company can grow so large that its failure
jeopardizes the entire financial system.
Earlier this year, Secretary Paulson proposed a blueprint that
would modernize our financial regulations. For example, the Federal
Reserve would be authorized to take a closer look at the operations
of companies across the financial spectrum and ensure that their
practices do not threaten overall financial stability. There are other
good ideas, and members of Congress should consider them. As they
do, they must ensure that efforts to regulate Wall Street do not end up
hampering our economy’s ability to grow.
In the long run, Americans have good reason to be confident
in our economic strength. Despite corrections in the marketplace
and instances of abuse, democratic capitalism is the best system
ever devised. It has unleashed the talents and the productivity, and
entrepreneurial spirit of our citizens. It has made this country the
best place in the world to invest and do business. And it gives our
economy the flexibility and resilience to absorb shocks, adjust, and
bounce back.
Our economy is facing a moment of great challenge. But we’ve
overcome tough challenges before — and we will overcome this
one. I know that Americans sometimes get discouraged by the tone
in Washington, and the seemingly endless partisan struggles. Yet
history has shown that in times of real trial, elected officials rise
to the occasion. And together, we will show the world once again
what kind of country America is — a nation that tackles problems
head on, where leaders come together to meet great tests, and where
people of every background can work hard, develop their talents, and
realize their dreams.
Thank you for listening. May God bless you.


Thank you, all. Thank you, Secretary Clough, for the
introduction. And congratulations on the opening of the Sant Ocean
Hall — which, by the way, opens tomorrow morning at 11:00 a.m.
The Secretary and I just had a fabulous tour. These exhibits in this
hall will remind people that our oceans are vital for our planet — this
is going to heighten awareness of how important our oceans are and
that we have a solemn duty to protect them.
And so I’ve come not only to see the hall and to herald its
opening, but to spend a little time talking about ocean conservation.
There are a lot of people in this room who care about ocean
conservation, and I appreciate you working with us to help preserve a
vital natural resource.
First of all, I do want to recognize the Chancellor of the
Smithsonian Institute’s Board of Regents — I call him the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court — Justice Roberts, thank you for
coming. I appreciate very much the Sant family — Roger and
Vicki; Roger turns out to be the Chairman of the Institute’s Board
of Regents, and a big supporter, obviously, of the Smithsonian,
otherwise they probably wouldn’t have named the hall for him. But
thank you for your generosity and your support.
Cristian Samper is the Director of the Smithsonian Museum
of Natural History, and he gave us a tour today and he’s a
knowledgeable fellow, a biologist, and he will make sure that these
exhibits remain relevant for the — you know, for the education of the
American people. And I want to than you, Cristian, for your service.
I’m proud to be here with a member of my Cabinet, Carlos
Gutierrez, Department of Commerce, which oversees NOAA,
which had something to do with this facility. I want to thank
Congresswoman Madeleine Bordallo — there she is, Madeleine,
————
581

good to see you, thank you for coming. She is from Guam. I
appreciate the winners of the National Ocean Art Contest who are
here today — that would be you all.
I’m about to talk about some policy we’ve been implementing,
and I want to thank all those in the room for helping. There’s a lot
of folks around the country and here in Washington who care deeply
about the oceans. And many of the organizations that have worked
constructively with our administration are here, and I thank you for
your efforts — because the truth of the matter is that we have got a
good record working with you. And I want to share some thought
about it.
First of all, you got to know I like oceans. I didn’t grow up in
the ocean — as a matter of fact — near the ocean — I grew up in
the desert. Therefore, it was a pleasant contrast to see the ocean.
And I particularly like it when I’m fishing. It turns out it’s a — I’m
not the first President likes to fish. It turns out the first President
really liked to fish. George Washington — I was reading where he
one time caught 100,000 herring in a single day. That’s either a lot
of fish or a lot of fishing. But unlike that George W., I have not had
that kind of luck before.
America is a maritime nation. Obviously the — protecting
the oceans are in our interest. It turns out that commercial and
recreational fishing add more than $76 billion to our economy every
year. Seaport-related businesses add an estimated $2 trillion in
economic activity. And the oceans are important for our economic
— you know, as an economic lifeline. They’re important to our
economy. Seas also offer limitless opportunities for recreation and
transportation and education and research. It all adds up to the fact
we got to be good stewards.
And so we developed what we call the Ocean Action Plan.
I’m a guy who likes — when people walk into my office, I like to
say, you know, what are the specific steps and how are we doing at
achieving them? This particular plan started off with 88 different
points of action, expectations — we’ve met 87 of them. When the
Senate passes a treaty, we will have met 88 of them. And it’s —
————
582

Many of you in this room helped develop the plan, many of
you helped implement the plan. And I thank you. The goal is to
make our oceans’ coast and Great Lakes cleaner, healthier, and more
productive. I want to spend a little time talking about some of the
successes.
Under the Ocean Action Plan we’ve worked to stop over-fishing.
Last year, I issued an executive order protecting two of our nation’s
most popular game fish — striped bass and red drum. I signed
important legislation reauthorizing the Magnuson Stevenson [sic]
Act, which sets a firm deadline to end over-fishing in America by
2011. Many in this hall helped pass that piece of legislation and I
thank you. Thanks to these and other efforts, we are beginning to see
progress toward ending over-fishing.
At the beginning of my administration, 44 fish stocks were listed
as over-fished. Today, almost half of those stocks are no longer on the
list. That’s good news. Along the way, we’ve stepped up our efforts
to identify additional fish stocks that are at risk — and we’re going to
take steps to protect them.
We’re protecting and restoring vital wetland and marine habitats.
In 2004, I set a goal of restoring, improving, and protecting 3 million
acres of interior and coastal wetlands in five years; we have met that
goal one year ahead of schedule. This effort includes our watershed
restoration project in the Florida Everglades, which is the largest
in the world. During my administration, we have put two-thirds of
federal waters — about 2.3 million square nautical miles — off-limits
to harmful bottom-trawling and dredging. We care what happens in
the oceans.
We made a special effort to protect the tropical forests of the
sea: coral reefs. Some of the most spectacular reefs are found in
the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands Marine National Monument,
which I created in June of 2006, thanks to the efforts of many in this
hall. This monument is the world’s largest fully protected marine
conservation area, and it covers more than 7,000 marine species — a
quarter of which are found nowhere else on Earth.
It’s promoted a culture of cooperative conservation.
————
583

Through programs like the Coastal America Partnership, we joined
with state and local governments, fishermen, and tribal leaders, and
tens of thousands of volunteers to improve conservation from the
Great Lakes to the Gulf Coast. One project which is dear to my heart
is when folks from the private sector helped to restore 10,000 acres
of tidal wetlands in my home state. For decades this area could be
the equivalent of a dust bowl, just neglected. Today it’s a thriving
ecosystem, filled with shorebirds and abundant fish.
Cooperative conservation works. It makes sense. It’s a strategy
that’s easy to implement when you find people willing to step up and
do their part.
We’re increasing international cooperation to protect the ocean
environment that affects all nations. Through the Coral Triangle
Initiative, we’re working with nations like Indonesia, and Malaysia,
and the Philippines, and Australia to identify and eliminate the
threats to tropical reefs. President Yudhoyono of Indonesia gets a lot
of credit for this initiative. He is bound and determined to protect
coral reefs around his nation, and we are bound and determined
to help him do so, by providing money, strategy, expertise and
encouragement. At the United Nations, we succeeded in passing
a resolution to help protect fish stocks and marine habitats from
destructive fishing practices.
A lot of our citizens don’t understand what’s taking place in
parts of the world, but people use dynamite to fish, or they poison
the fish stocks in order to — in order to net them, or they use
destructive bottom trawling. And we’re using our influence to stop
those kind of practices.
We’re expanding ocean research. There is more left to learn
about the oceans — there’s probably more to learn about the oceans
than we need to learn about the moon — or that we know about the
moon. And so to help unlock these mysteries, we’ve launched a TenYear Ocean Research Priorities Plan. Research supported by the plan
is helping to reduce shipping’s impact on the environment, improve
our understanding of important ocean conditions like red tides, teach
us more about the oceans’ role in climate change, and improve our
————
584

ability to protect Americans from natural disasters like hurricanes
and tsunamis.
We’re expanding education programs to teach citizens more
about the oceans. The truth of the matter is there’s a knowledge
gap between what scientists and biologists understand about oceans
and what our citizens understand about it. So we’ve ensured that
teachers and students and the public have access to the most up-todate marine science. Laura was particularly moved when she went
out to the Hawaiian National Monument to learn about the effects of
debris — you know, people just dropping stuff all over their boats
and it gets in these currents and kills birds and clogs the ecosystem.
She’s been very active about educating the young and old about the
importance of making sure we’re wise about marine not — stopping
marine debris. The Coastal Ecosystem Learning Center Network is
a interesting, innovative idea where the public can learn hands on
about sea life at more than 20 of America’s top aquariums. So there
will be kiosks in each aquarium that are connected to here, as well as
around the nation and people can get information at their fingertips.
The great achievement, of course, is this new hall. It’s built
through a partnership between NOAA and the Smithsonian. It’s
going to introduce visitors to all kinds of interesting things —
prehistoric predators, what life is like around a coral reef, an
animated display of the oceans’ impact on the global environment.
It’s worthwhile for our citizens to come here, I think you’re going to
learn a lot. As part of the exhibit’s opening, a half-mile-long mural
of ocean art by children from 110 countries will show visitors to
the National Mall the beauty of sea life around the world. And of
course, we thank those artists. My favorite exhibit was the 24-foot
giant squid. The squid was brought all the way from Spain as a joint
operation between the Navy and the Air Force, appropriately called
“Operation Calamari.” I do want to thank our military for bringing
the deal here, it’s worth looking at it. Admiral, I don’t know if you
had anything to do with it, but it’s — if you did, it must have been a
heck of an operation.
And then people are going to come here and they’re going to be
————
585

amazed to see a 45-foot replica of a female Right Whale. There
are fewer than 400 North Atlantic Right Whales left in the world.
And the model in this hall is inspired by a whale that got tangled
in fishing gear, but got herself free. She was given the appropriate
name of “Phoenix” — and under the Ocean Action Plan, we’ve
worked hard to protect whales like her. Part of the 88 different
actions we’ve taken was to work on smart whale policy. And
people in this room have helped. For example, we now require
fishermen to use more whale-friendly gear. Based on a careful
study of where Right Whales and ships are most likely to collide,
we’ve rerouted the shipping lanes near Boston Harbor. The action
reduced the danger to Right Whales like the Phoenix by nearly 60
percent.
And there are going to be new regulations that will be coming
to be shortly that require ships to slow down as they approach
seaports where these whales are likely to be.
In all these ways, the Ocean Action Plan is helping to protect
our planet’s most essential natural resource. Yet we’re going
to do more. And so I’ve asked — I told people I’m sprinting to
the finish; I mean, four months, you can actually get a lot done.
And so I’ve asked the Secretaries of the Interior, Commerce, and
Defense, as well as the CEQ Chairman, to work to find additional
areas in the Pacific that could be eligible for federal protection.
We will improve our wetlands work by protecting, restoring, and
improving an additional four million acres. It’s important to set
clear goals. We have set clear goals in this administration, we
have met those goals and, in this case, we’re setting a new goal.
We will expand the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary to
include the Davidson Seamount. This 585-square-nautical-mile
addition will safeguard one of the largest known seamounts in
U.S. waters, and it will protect an extraordinary array of ocean
creatures.
All Americans have a responsibility and obligation to be good
stewards of our environment. And one person who understands
that is Pietro Parravano. I met Pietro today. He is a commercial
————
586

fisherman in Half Moon Bay, California. He was as excited to see
this exhibit as I was. When a project to expand the nearby Port of
Oakland threatened the bay’s fishing grounds, Pietro helped broker
an agreement that allowed the expansion of the port while protecting
Half Moon Bay. Pietro has continued his cooperative conservation
work at the local, state, and federal, and international levels. This
fisherman has been honored by NOAA and the EPA. He says:
“[Conservation] needs to be everyone’s priority, because the oceans
belong to all Americans.”
I don’t know where you are, Pietro, but — somewhere around
here — wherever you are — there he is. Thanks, Pietro. Only in
America. We’re sure glad you’re here and thanks for your work.
Pietro shows that, you know, you can make a difference in your
communities; it’s just not all that hard. And part of the purpose of this
fantastic facility is to encourage people to do that when it comes to
the oceans.
I believe that the research that’s going on and the actions
that will be taken by this administration — hopefully future
administrations — will say to our children and grandchildren, we
saw our responsibility and we met it; that those of us who work here
in Washington came here to be a constructive force, to see problems
before they became acute, and we did something about it. And for
those of you in this room who are doing something about it, I thank
you from the bottom of my heart, and so will future generations of
Americans. God bless.

Thank you, all. Madam President. Madam President I could not
think of anybody better to give me dancing lessons than you. We
love you. I love your spirit. I love your leadership. I love the example
you set for leaders all across the globe. And it’s an honor to be here
with you.
And it’s an honor to be here with you all. I welcome you to the
White House Summit on International Development. It’s a summit
to herald the outstanding work being done to lift up souls in need. I
appreciate the fact that folks in this room represent thousands that
are replacing disease with health, dependency with self-reliance, and
despair with hope.
The people gathered here come from different countries — I
see we represent different professions — but we’re united by our
commitment to charting a new era in development. Today I’m
going to talk with you about this new philosophy, about the way it’s
transforming countries and saving lives, and about why it’s essential
to continue in the years ahead.
Before I do so, I want to recognize not only the President, but
her son, Robert. I suspect your mother tells you what to do like my
mother tells me what to do. As a matter of fact, your mother tells me
what to do. Welcome.
Congressman Donald Payne, we’re sure proud you’re here;
thank you, Mr. Chairman, for coming. Much of the success of
the programs we’ve implemented are due to, one, the generosity
of the American people, but also the fine group of people that
are implementers: Henrietta Fore, the Administrator of USAID;
Rob Mosbacher, President and CEO of OPIC; Ambassador John
Danilovich, Millennium Challenge Corporation CEO; Ambassador
————
589

Mark Dybul, U.S. Global AIDS Coordinator; Rear Admiral Tim
Ziemer, U.S. Malaria Coordinator. Thank you all for being leaders.
The second choice to introduce me was Bob Geldof, musician.
Of course, he’d have got up and said, I saw him try to sing while in
Africa. I’ve come to really appreciate Bob Geldof. He is a genuine
person who has used his fame to help others in need, and it is a —
it’s been a joy to work with you. You know, you and I might look
differently, but I think we share the same compassion and the same
hopes. And thank you for joining us today.
I want to thank the panelists who have participated in this
conference. I do want to welcome members of the Diplomatic Corps;
thank you all for coming by today.
You know, we meet today in the middle of a serious global
financial crisis. Over the past few weeks, we have seen how the
world’s economies are more interconnected than ever before. The
crisis is having a major impact on working people all over the world
— including many in developing nations.
During times of economic crisis, some may be tempted to turn
inward — focusing on our problems here at home, while ignoring
our interests around the world. This would be a serious mistake.
America is committed — and America must stay committed — to
international development for reasons that remain true regardless
of the ebb and flow of the markets. We believe that development is
in America’s security interests. We face an enemy that can’t stand
freedom. And the only way they can recruit to their hateful ideology
is by exploiting despair — and the best way to respond is to spread
hope.
We believe that we ought to remain committed to development
because it’s in our long-term economic interests. When America
helps developing nations rise out of poverty, we create new markets
for our goods and services, and better jobs for American workers.
And we’re committed to development because it’s in our moral
interests. I strongly believe in the timeless truth: To whom much is
given, much is required. We are a blessed nation and I believe we
have a duty to help those less fortunate around the world. We believe
————
590

that power to save lives comes with the obligation to use it. And I
believe our nation is better when we help people fight hunger and
disease and illiteracy.
For all of these reasons, this administration has made
international development one of our biggest priorities. As the
President mentioned, we’ve worked with partner nations — as well
as the World Bank, and the IMF, and the African Development Bank,
and the Inter-American Development Bank — to relieve tens of
billions of dollars in debt from some of the world’s poorest nations.
By relieving crushing debt burdens, it gives people hope. We’ve
also worked with wealthier nations to provide aid in the form of
grants instead of loans. For the past eight years, the United States
has provided more foreign assistance than at any time in the past half
century.
We’re using this aid to foster sustainable economic growth, and
promote good governance, and advance a model of true partnership
that gives poor nations a real stake in their own development. We’re
encouraging volunteer organizations, local charities, and the faith
community to take on an even greater role — because we strongly
believe that they offer a compassion that no government can offer.
Most of all, we’re insisting on accountability in return for our
assistance, so we can assure that our generosity leads to measurable
results. You know, for too long, foreign aid was designed to make us
feel good. Now, we’re ensuring that our resources do good.
This new approach to development is embodied by a
revolutionary initiative called the Millennium Challenge Account.
See, this program says that the United States will help. But we
expect countries that we help to fight corruption and to govern justly.
There’s nothing more pitiful than to have people’s hopes robbed
by corrupt government officials. We say to those we want to help
support, open markets to trade and investment, and above all, invest
in your people’s health and education. You see, by tying our aid to
these policies, we are encouraging developing nations to make tough
economic and political and social reforms. We encourage leaders to
respect their citizens, uphold human dignity, and work to earn the
————
591

trust of their people. This approach is based on a clear conviction:
People in the developing world have the capacity to improve their
own lives — and they will rise to meet high standards.
I refuse to accept the development model that says, oh, these
people are doomed forever; let’s just throw money at the problem.
We believe that if you set high standards, good people will rise to
meet those standards, regardless of where they live in the world.
So the Millennium Challenge Account is a robust program that
has invested $6.7 billion in 35 countries around the world. From
Albania, to Moldova, to Indonesia, to Mongolia, to Paraguay, to
Peru, these partnerships are helping developing nations take charge
of their future — and more importantly, unleash the talents of their
people.
For example, this February President Kikwete of Tanzania
and I signed a five-year, nearly $700 million compact to improve
the country’s transportation, energy, and water supply. It’s pretty
basic needs, isn’t it? Transportation, energy and water supply.
The partnership will build roads that connect rural Tanzanians to
markets and schools and health clinics. It’s hard to have a modern
society if you can’t get your product from rural to urban — urban
centers in your country. It’s hard to get doctors to help people in
the rural part of the country if you don’t have roads to connect
health care clinics to those in need. It’s going to extend electricity
to homes and businesses in some of the most remote areas of the
country. It will increase access to clean drinking water, which will
help reduce preventable diseases, especially in young children.
Through these projects, the Millennium Challenge compact is
helping Tanzania build a foundation for success in the 21st century
— and showing the promise of a new era in development.
In the new era of development, America and our partners are
helping to meet basic human needs like food and clean water.
There’s nothing more basic than food and clean water. Since 2002,
the United States has provided more than $16 billion in food
assistance — helping to ensure that tens of millions of people
around the world do not go hungry. In response to the current
————
592

global food crisis, we’ve committed $5.5 billion to address global
hunger over the next two years. And that’s important. These are
stopgap measures. The American people care when they hear people
are going hungry around the world. And I want to thank the American
people for their generosity.
But as we work to resolve the crisis in the long run, we have got
to find better solutions for global hunger in the long-term. In the short
run we’re helping; in the long term, we’re developing a strategy and
working with partners to help them grow their own food. There’s no
other way to put it. The best long-term policy for the United States is
to help nations develop their own agricultural industry, so we don’t
have to deal with global food crisis year in and year out.
And so we supply poor and rural farmers with fertilizer and
water-management systems. We distribute better seeds that will
boost yields, and invest in research that will make crops like rice
and wheat more resistant to drought and pests. You know, one of the
really important challenges that this administration has taken on,
and future administrations must take on, is to say to other markets
around the world: It is okay to import markets to crops grown with
biotechnology. A lot of countries are resistant upon introducing these
new technologically advanced crops because they fear they’re not
going to be able to sell their crops elsewhere. And yet these crops will
help people realize a vibrant agricultural industry.
I believe that as the United States moves forward, we ought to
purchase up to a quarter of our food from local farmers. In other
words, of all the food aid we get we ought to take a quarter of that,
Donald, and purchase the food directly from local farmers. If it’s in
our interest to help build a local agricultural industry, then instead
of just giving food, we ought to purchase food from the farmers
themselves, to help build a vibrant agricultural sector in parts of the
world where food is desperately needed. And I support the World
Bank’s strategy to increase investment in agriculture.
What I’m telling you is there’s a better way than just a kind of
patchwork approach. It’s an approach that basically says we can use
our technological advancement and our expertise to help build vibrant
————
593

agricultural industries in nations where there ought to be crops today.
The United States works with partner nations to deal with the
lack of clean water. Last year we dedicated nearly a billion dollars to
improve sanitation and water supplies in developing nations. We’re
also wise enough to enlist the private sector to help, as well.
I want to share with you an interesting program — for two
reasons, one, it’s interesting, and two, my wife thought of it —
(laughter) — or has actually been involved with it; she didn’t think
of it. But she thought of it for this speech. She has been involved
with a public-private partnership called the PlayPumps Alliance. It
brings together international foundations and corporations and the
U.S. government. Now, catch this: PlayPumps are children’s merrygo-rounds attached to a water pump and a storage tank. When the
wheel turns, clean drinking water is produced. And as my good wife
says, PlayPumps are fueled by a limitless energy source — children
at play.
The United States is working with our partners to install 4,000
pumps in schools and communities across sub-Sahara Africa, which
will provide clean drinking water to as many as 10 million people.
It’s not that hard to help people get clean drinking water. It takes
focus, imagination, and effort. And I call upon all nations around the
world to join us.
In the new era of development, America and our partners
recognize that education is the gateway to prosperity and essential to
any society’s long-term success. It’s pretty obvious, isn’t it? If people
are educated, they can read the instructions on a medicine bottle.
They can keep receipts for a small business. They can learn about the
rights and privileges they have under their country’s constitutions.
Yet too many people can’t read. America and our partners are
determined to extend the promise of good education to more people
in the developing world.
In the Middle East, USAID has partnered with local officials
to start kindergartens in Jordan, taught hundreds of thousands of
children about information technology in Morocco, built 70 schools
for girls in Egypt.
————
594

Through our Africa Education Initiative, as the President
mentioned, the United States has trained more than 700,000 teachers.
I think you said a million teachers? Yes, I’ll go for a million then.
Somewhere between 700,000 and a million. Distributed more than
10 million textbooks — somewhere between 10 million and 15
million — and provided hundreds of thousands of scholarships to
help girls go to school.
Last year I announced a new initiative that will devote $425
million to improve education in Ethiopia and Ghana and Honduras
and Liberia and Mali and Yemen. Why? Why do we do that? Because
the truth of the matter is, we want children to fulfill their Godgiven potential, is why we do that. And so we’re helping to train the
doctors and the lawyers and the engineers and entrepreneurs and the
women Presidents who will be vital to the future of the developing
world.
In the new era of development, America and our partners are
helping to lift the burden of deadly disease. In Africa, the treatable
and preventable disease of malaria kills one child every 30 seconds.
So in 2005 I launched a five-year, $1.2 billion initiative that cut the
number of malaria-related deaths in 15 African nations by half.
Through the initiative, we joined with African governments —
notice, “we joined with African governments” — to design malaria
control strategies that will work with their nations. We expect results
for the money we spend. And yet we’re confident when we work
with governments that they can develop the strategy necessary to
achieve the objectives. And so we supply the money, and our partner
nations work to distribute insecticide-treated bed nets, conduct
indoor spraying campaigns, and provide cutting-edge drugs.
The interesting thing about this initiative is it’s easy to measure
whether or not we’re being successful. In the new development
agenda, results matter a lot. And therefore, when the United States
works with countries, we expect there to be a well-defined strategy
and the ability to measure whether or not our money is working. I
don’t think that’s too much to ask, nor do the people who are trying
to help think that’s too much to ask.
————
595

So far, our efforts have reached 25 million people. In places
like Zambia, and Ethiopia, and Rwanda, and Zanzibar, the numbers
of people sick or dying from malaria have dropped dramatically. We
have not only made progress around the edges, we’ve made dramatic
progress in saving lives. I find that the work to defeat malaria is
exciting work, and it is inspiring work. And frankly, it’s not all that
hard to design a strategy to get bed nets to people. And I want to
thank my fellow citizens for caring deeply about this initiative. And I
want to thank our partners for working hard to make sure that a mom
won’t have to worry about her child dying because of a mosquito
bite.
The President talked about our fight against HIV/AIDS. And
it’s a noble battle and it’s a necessary battle. In 2003, as she had
mentioned, we launched PEPFAR. The program is the largest
commitment by any nation to combat a single disease in human
history. Ambassador Dybul and I believe that the program is
effective because it is defined by a few key principles. You know,
if you’re going to have a new era of development, it’s important
to have clear definitions. It’s one thing just to throw money at the
problem, it’s another thing to insist upon strategies that actually
work. So the emergency plan demands specific measurable targets
for progress. His job is to not only put the implementers in place
and to find those souls who are on the front lines of saving lives
and empower them; his job is to report back to the President and
say, “Here is the progress we’re making, Mr. President.” That way
it gives me a chance to say, “Well, if you’re not making enough
progress Mark, do something differently, please.”
It employs a prevention strategy that works: ABC, which means
abstinence, be faithful, and use condoms. This isn’t guesswork;
this is a program that is working. It puts local partners in the lead,
because they know the needs of their people best. It enlists new
partners from the international community, the private sector and the
faith community.
I can’t tell you how many people that I’ve met in the United
States who say, “I’m part of PEPFAR, because my church has
————
596

adopted the program.” You know, there’s nothing better than having
people who hear the universal call to love a brother like you’d like to
be loved yourselves on the front line of helping to save lives.
And the United States government is smart enough to enlist
the compassion and love and hard work of people in the faith
community in the United States to help our brothers and sisters in
need. So far, the results are striking. When we launched the initiative
in 2003, only 50,000 people in sub-Sahara Africa were receiving
anti-retroviral treatment.
Today we support treatment for nearly 1.7 million people in
the region, and tens of thousands of more around the world, from
Asia, to the Caribbean, to Eastern Europe. PEPFAR has supported
care for nearly 7 million people, including millions of orphans and
vulnerable children. PEPFAR has allowed nearly 200,000 children
in Africa to be born HIV-free. PEPFAR is working. And I want to
thank the United States Congress for coming together to re-authorize
and dramatically expand this program.
I’m sure that many of you had the same experiences that Laura
and I’ve had in meeting people whose lives have been touched by
the initiatives we’re talking about today. I’ll never forget meeting
Harriet Namutebi. She is — we met her in Africa on our trip five
years ago. She lost her brother, her husband, and one of her children
to AIDS. She was diagnosed, she locked herself in her room, she
refused to eat, and she wanted to die.
But at a clinic supported by PEPFAR, Harriet was given a new
lease on life. Counselors at the clinic showed Harriet how to live
positively with HIV. A loving soul took this person who was in
despair and said, here’s a chance for you.
Thanks to the antiretroviral treatments Harriet received,
she is now in good health. She cares for four children. She is an
enthusiastic member of the clinic’s drama group, which educates
others about HIV. She is living proof of what people in Africa call
the “Lazarus Effect” — communities once given up for dead are now
being brought back to life. And it is a joy to be a part of PEPFAR.
In the new era of development, we are working with partners to
————
597

unleash the greatest engine of prosperity the world has ever known,
and that is free trade. For developing nations, the value of trade is
nearly 40 times the value of foreign aid. Let me repeat that: For
developing nations, the value of trade is 40 times the value of foreign
aid. Isn’t that an interesting statistic? What should that tell you? It
says if you’re interested in helping the developing world, promote
trade. That’s what it ought to tell you.
According to the World Bank, the complete elimination of
barriers to trading goods would boost annual income in developing
countries by more than $140 billion. I think that would go a long
way, don’t you, Madam President?
You know, trade opens growth, ignites growth, but it also
produces other benefits. It helps increase transparency. It helps
increase the rule of law. During my administration we have worked
hard to reduce barriers to trade and investment. When I took office,
we had free trade agreements in effect with three nations. Today, we
have them with 14 nations; most of them are developing countries.
My predecessor, President Clinton, did a smart thing with the
African Growth and Opportunity Act. My administration had the
honor of extending that Act. In 2005, I worked with Congress to pass
a free trade agreement with the Dominican Republic and nations in
Central America — it’s called CAFTA. And although it’s still in its
early stages, trade between participating countries with the U.S. is
up 30 percent since its enactment. Do you know what that means?
That means more jobs for workers in those countries. It means more
food for families. It means more investment that developing countries
need to grow and prosper. That’s what that means.
Trade is essential to prosperity in both good economic times
and bad. During periods of crisis, like the one we’re in now,
protectionism may seem like the best way to safeguard wealth.
But when major economies try to wall themselves off, they deny
themselves the growth that comes from exports and deepen poverty
by depriving poor nations of vital markets for their goods. You
see, in the midst of this crisis, I believe the world ought to send a
clear signal that we remain committed to open markets by reducing
————
598

barriers to trade across the globe. The recent impasse in the Doha
Round of trade talks is disappointing, but that doesn’t have to be the
final word. And so before I leave office, I’m going to press hard to
make sure we have a successful Doha Round.
In this new era of development, countries that make the
courageous choice to embrace democracy must realize the economic
benefits that go with it. When young democracies do not deliver
improvements in their people’s daily lives, the people start to lose
faith in free societies; that’s a fact.
For example, let’s talk about our own neighborhood. I believe
it’s in our interest that we have a good, sound neighborhood. It’s
in our interest our neighborhood prosper and get along. And we’ve
seen hopeful advances for democracy and free enterprise in North
and South America. There’s no doubt about it. There’s been some
amazing advances. Yet there’s also voices that challenge free markets
and democratic values — quite loud voices. Some of them have
gained a following, because amid the progress in our hemisphere, we
also see terrible want. What the campesinos and trabajadores want
is — what they don’t need is false populism; what they do need is
social justice. And the development aid of the United States has been
focused on providing social justice in our neighborhood.
True social justice requires creating new opportunities for
prosperity and upward mobility. So working in partnership with
Latin American nations, we’ve helped more than 400,000 poor and
disadvantaged children learn to read. We’ve increased economic
opportunity by relieving debt and opening trade, as I mentioned.
We’ve delivered aid that empowers the poor and the marginalized.
Since I took office — with support from the Congress — the United
States has provided nearly $15 billion to the region with a special
focus on helping the poor.
True social justice requires government institutions that are
fair and effective and free from corruption. You can’t have social
justice if your government is stealing from you. Since 2001, the
United States has doubled our worldwide commitment to programs
that foster democracy and good government — including programs
————
599

in Latin America. We’ve entered into the Millennium Challenge
Account agreements with six nations in Latin America and the
Caribbean — and a number of other countries are pursuing compacts.
We’ve worked with countries like El Salvador to train law
enforcement officers who can combat criminal gangs. Mexico,
we’re partnering with the government to stop smugglers who
traffic in everything from guns to human beings. Colombia, we’ve
worked closely with President Uribe to defeat the cocaine cartels
and narcoterrorists. By the way, it is no coincidence last year that
Colombia’s economy saw its largest growth in nearly three decades,
because that country has got a strong leader willing to take on the
FARC.
True social justice requires compassion. And some of the
greatest work of compassion in Latin America is being done by
the United States military. I don’t know if you ever heard of the
Navy hospital ship called the Comfort, but it sailed to 12 countries
in Latin America and the Caribbean last year. Doctors treated tens
of thousands of poor patients, and conducted more than 26,000
surgeries. Dentists and hygienists filled cavities and cared for
infections and treated young children. These men and women are
showing that the nations of Latin America have a strong partner in
the United States of America. They’re a part of our efforts to show
that the institutions of freedom and capitalism and democracy are not
threats to be feared, but the surest path to social justice there is.
From fostering good governance and reform, to alleviating
hunger and disease, to advancing education, prosperity and justice,
our new approach to development has shown inspiring signs of
success. Yet this success can be reversed, and the cost of abandoning
our commitments would be far higher than the cost of fulfilling them.
So I urge both parties in Congress to ensure that our development
efforts remain an enduring priority of the United States.
I call on other members of the G8 and the United Nations, as
well as our fellow contributors to the Global Fund, to follow through
on their pledges. Corporations and foundations have shared their
resources and expertise with the developing world, and I urge them
————
600

to continue their generosity. Faith-based groups have done amazing
work to heal the sick and lift up the suffering, and I urge them to
carry on their missions of mercy.
It’s amazing what individual Americans have done to help with
the new era of development. I got a Christmas gift from one of my
little nephews, which was mosquito nets. Thousands of individuals
and schoolchildren all across the country are donating $10 to buy a
mosquito net to help save a life. There are people who are raising
money for HIV/AIDS initiative. There are people who are going on a
service mission with their house of worship. These folks are making
a huge contribution, and I urge them to continue their good work.
History shows what happens when America combines our
great compassion with our steadfast determination. We are a
compassionate people and we are a determined people. During
a recent visit, a good friend of mine shared his vivid childhood
memories of the Marshall Plan. We were standing on the South
Lawn. He said he’ll never forget the kindness America showed his
nation in a time of need, and now that man is the Prime Minister
of Italy. And last week, Silvio Berlusconi expressed his enduring
loyalty and gratitude to the people of the United States.
It’s not hard to imagine what fruits our compassion will yield 60
years from today. We can see it in the faces of Afghan girls going to
school for the first time. We can see them in the proud eyes of Latin
American workers providing for themselves and for their families.
We see them in the joy of new African mothers whose babies are
protected from malaria and HIV. We see them in the outpouring of
thanks throughout the developing world. I’m just so sorry that not
every American could have been with Laura and me to see what we
saw in our trip to Africa last year. Schoolchildren sang songs about
America’s generosity. One shop-owner, I think who was in Liberia,
Madam President, painted his stall in our nation’s colors. Tens of
thousands of people lined the roadsides during our visit, cheering
and waving American flags in gratitude to the American people.
I’m honored to be the President of such a nation filled with
people — filled with people of such generosity and goodness. I’m
————
601

proud to join with all of you in ushering in a new era of development.
This is an historic commitment that we all can be proud of — one that
will secure a bright future for our partners in the developing world,
one that will make America a better place. God bless you.


Thank you. Mr. Director, thank you for your kind introduction
and thank you for your leadership. Proud that you invited your wife,
Ann, here to be with us. I thank the Attorney General for joining
us today. Members of the FBI Academy staff, distinguished guests,
family and friends, and most importantly, members of the graduating
class: Thanks for having me.
I am so pleased to be back to the FBI Academy, and to share
with you this special day. When you walk across the stage, you will
receive your badge and your credentials. You’ll become special
agents of the FBI. You will take your place on the front lines on
the war on terror. I thank you for stepping forward to serve your
country during this important time. And on behalf of all Americans, I
congratulate the Class of 08-14.
This academy has prepared you for the privileges and
responsibilities of carrying the badge. Over the past 20 weeks, you
have passed rigorous academic and physical requirements. You
have spent hours practicing your aim on the firing range, combing
the streets of Hogan’s Alley, and navigating the Academy’s “gerbil
tubes.” As part of your training, you were all forced to endure the
sting of pepper spray — which you learned wasn’t half as bad as the
cafeteria food.
To reach this day of accomplishment, you have all depended on
the wisdom and advice of your instructors. They took a diverse group
that includes combat veterans, police officers, firefighters, lawyers,
language experts, and computer specialists. And they turned you into
an impressive class of FBI special agents. Your instructors are proud
of your accomplishments — and I know you are grateful for their
leadership.
————
603

To reach this day of accomplishment, you depended on the
support of your loved ones. While you were away training for this
academy, some of them were really sweating out the training for you.
And Rick mentioned a lot of you were packing bags. I’m thankful
you didn’t mention Crawford, Texas. And so are you.
But the point is, America owes your families a great debt. And
we thank you for standing by your side — thank them for standing
by your side during this moment of training and the service you’ll be
rendering to our country. We welcome the families here today.
Members of this class join the FBI during a momentous time
in our nation’s history. Earlier this summer the FBI celebrated its
100th anniversary. Unfortunately I wasn’t able to attend the official
ceremony. So I asked the Attorney General to speak in my place. To
be honest, I was somewhat concerned that he might not live up to my
high standards of oratory. He told me I had nothing to worry about.
The Bureau has come a long way since its founding. Over
the past century, the FBI has grown from a small team of 34
investigators to a powerful force of more than 30,000 agents and
analysts and support professionals serving around the world. The
FBI has pushed the boundaries of forensic science — from mastering
the art of fingerprints to pioneering the use of DNA evidence. The
FBI has inspired generations of children to dream of joining the
force. Sounds like I inspired one or two myself.
In every era, the FBI has risen to meet new challenges. When
mobsters brought crime and chaos to America’s cities during the
1920s and ‘30s, the G-Men of the FBI brought them to justice. When
America entered the Second World War, the FBI stopped Axis agents
from carrying out attacks on our homeland. During the Cold War, the
FBI worked long hours to protect America from Soviet spies. In all
this work, the FBI has gained an incredible record of achievement
and has earned the admiration of the entire world. America honors all
the fine men and women who have served in the ranks before you.
As you go forth from this Academy, you’re going to write
a new chapter in the FBI’s storied history. In the years ahead,
your assignments will be as diverse as the FBI’s mission — from
————
604

dismantling organized criminal networks, to pulling the plug on
online predators, to making white-collar criminals pay for defrauding
hardworking Americans. And just as your predecessors adapted to
meet the challenges of the past century, there’s no doubt in my mind
you’ll respond with courage to confront the emerging dangers of this
new century.
Those dangers became clear on September the 11th, 2001. On
that day, 19 terrorists brought death and destruction to our shores.
We became a nation at war against violent extremists. And we must
not rest until that war is won.
More than seven years have passed without another attack
on our soil. And this is not an accident. Since 9/11, we have gone
on the offense against the terrorists abroad — so we do not have
to face them here at home. We stand with young democracies in
Afghanistan and Iraq and beyond as they seek to replace the hateful
ideology of the extremists with a hopeful alternative of liberty.
Here at home, we’ve transformed our national security
institutions and have given our intelligence and law enforcement
professionals the tools and the resources they need to do their
job, and that is to protect the American people. We formed a new
Department of Homeland Security. We created a new Director for
National Intelligence. We established a program at the Central
Intelligence Agency to interrogate key terrorist leaders captured
in the war on terror. We worked with Congress to pass legislation
that allows our intelligence professionals to quickly and effectively
monitor terrorist communications while protecting the civil liberties
of our citizens. If al Qaeda is making a phone call into the United
States, we need to know why and to whom they’re calling in order to
protect the American citizens.
The FBI has played a vital role in doing the most important job
that government has, and that is to secure the American people from
harm. Since 9/11, the Bureau has worked with our partners around
the world to disrupt planned terrorist attacks. Most Americans will
never know the full stories of how these attacks were stopped and
how many lives were saved. But we know this: The men and women
————
605

of the FBI are working tirelessly to keep our nation safe — and they
have the thanks of the American people.
The FBI’s leadership in the war on terror has required a dramatic
change of mission. Before 9/11, terrorism was viewed primarily as a
criminal matter. The FBI focused more on indicting terrorists after an
attack than on stopping the attack in the first place. For example, after
the terrorists targeted the World Trade Center in 1993, FBI agents
succeeded in tracking down several of the killers. They obtained
indictments against them and they put them behind bars. And that
was good work. But eight years later al Qaeda returned to finish the
job.
Immediately after 9/11, the FBI made preventing terrorism its
top priority. The FBI you join today is focused on collecting and
analyzing intelligence — so we can figure out what the terrorists
are planning before it is too late. Over the past seven years, we
have more than doubled the number of intelligence analysts and
translators on the force. We’ve enacted the Patriot Act to ensure FBI
analysts and investigators have the information they need to protect
our nation. We created the FBI’s new National Security Branch —
bringing together divisions responsible for counterterrorism and
intelligence and counterespionage.
The FBI you join today is working more closely with partners
at all levels of government. At the local level, we’ve increased
the number of FBI Joint Terrorism Task Forces from 35 to more
than 100. These task forces bring together federal and local law
enforcement agents. They have helped break up terror cells in places
like Portland, Oregon; Buffalo, New York; and northern Virginia.
At the national level, we created the National Counterterrorism
Center, where the FBI is working side by side with the CIA, the
Homeland Security Department, and other federal agencies to track
terrorist threats and prevent new attacks. We created the Terrorism
Screening Center to consolidate watch lists from different agencies
into one master list.
At the international level, we’ve deployed the FBI to foreign
countries to help track down the terrorists. Since September the 11th,
————
606

the FBI has opened 16 new offices overseas. Two of them are in
Kabul and Baghdad — where hundreds of FBI agents are serving
alongside our brave men and women in uniform.
The FBI can be proud of all these accomplishments. These
changes were difficult, and they were necessary. We’ve transformed
an agency founded a century ago to meet the challenges of the 21st
century. And thanks to the vision and determination of the FBI,
America is safer today than we were on September the 11th, 2001.
In the midst of this rapid change, we can be confident that one
thing will never change — and that is the character and courage of
those who carry the badge. We see this character and courage in
the story of an agent named Leonard Hatton. A bomb specialist for
the FBI, Lenny had investigated terrorist attacks around the world.
So when he saw smoke rising from the World Trade Center on
September the 11th, 2001, he immediately understood the danger.
With complete disregard for his own life, he ran to the scene to help
others escape. And when the towers came crashing down, Lenny
died beneath them. Earlier that same morning, Lenny had told his
wife, “Just another regular day at work.” Well, for a man like Lenny
Hatton — who always put others before himself — it was another
day at work. We must always honor the memory of this good and
faithful servant — and we vow that those who have given their lives
in the war on terror shall never have died in vain.
As new special agents, your charge to keep is to carry out this
mission. I ask you to defend the values of fidelity, bravery, and
integrity that you have learned here at this Academy. I ask you to
carry out your duty to protect the lives and liberties of the American
people. If you follow these principles, your careers will take you
far, this agency will uphold its solemn responsibility, and America’s
security will be in good hands.
I want to thank you for sharing your graduation with me. I’m
inspired by your examples of service. I wish you all the best in the
future. May God bless you.


Good morning. Last night, I had a warm conversation with
President-elect Barack Obama. I congratulated him and Senator
Biden on their impressive victory. I told the President-elect he can
count on complete cooperation from my administration as he makes
the transition to the White House.
I also spoke to Senator John McCain. I congratulated him on a
determined campaign that he and Governor Palin ran. The American
people will always be grateful for the lifetime of service John
McCain has devoted to this nation. And I know he’ll continue to
make tremendous contributions to our country.
No matter how they cast their ballots, all Americans can be
proud of the history that was made yesterday. Across the country,
citizens voted in large numbers. They showed a watching world
the vitality of America’s democracy, and the strides we have made
toward a more perfect union. They chose a President whose journey
represents a triumph of the American story — a testament to hard
work, optimism, and faith in the enduring promise of our nation.
Many of our citizens thought they would never live to see
that day. This moment is especially uplifting for a generation of
Americans who witnessed the struggle for civil rights with their own
eyes — and four decades later see a dream fulfilled.
A long campaign has now ended, and we move forward as one
nation. We’re embarking on a period of change in Washington,
yet there are some things that will not change. The United States
government will stay vigilant in meeting its most important
responsibility — protecting the American people. And the world
can be certain this commitment will remain steadfast under our next
Commander-in-Chief.
There’s important work to do in the months ahead, and I will
————
609

continue to conduct the people’s business as long as this office
remains in my trust. During this time of transition, I will keep the
President-elect fully informed on important decisions. And when
the time comes on January the 20th, Laura and I will return home
to Texas with treasured memories of our time here — and with
profound gratitude for the honor of serving this amazing country.
It will be a stirring sight to watch President Obama, his wife,
Michelle, and their beautiful girls step through the doors of the White
House. I know millions of Americans will be overcome with pride
at this inspiring moment that so many have awaited so long. I know
Senator Obama’s beloved mother and grandparents would have been
thrilled to watch the child they raised ascend the steps of the Capitol
— and take his oath to uphold the Constitution of the greatest nation
on the face of the earth.
Last night I extended an invitation to the President-elect and
Mrs. Obama to come to the White House. And Laura and I are
looking forward to welcoming them as soon as possible.
Thank you very much.

————
610

